The Building Blocks of Language 380
How Language Conveys Meaning 385
How We Learn a Language 396
Language Learning in Changed Environments 404
Language Learning with Changed Endowments 410
Language and Thought 415
Some Final Thoughts: Language and Cognition 421
Summary 422
10
C H A P T E R 379
Language
It’s a pretty good bet that if Martian psychologists came
down (or is it “up”?) to Earth to investigate its creatures, they wouldn’t immediately
pick out the humans as being an especially remarkable example. After all, we don’t
have the lion’s magnificent mane, the soaring flight of the eagle, the peacock’s extravagant
feathers, the elephant’s impressive bulk or the shark’s rapacious bite. In fact,
ours seems a rather unspectacular species—dull of tooth and short of claw, awkwardly
bobbing along on two legs with our patchy coats and pointy noses.We don’t
even have whiskers or tails.
But we humans have one unique glory that apes can’t ape, crows can’t crow about,
and parrots can only parrot.We have the gift of language, and we have always understood
the power it conveys, allowing us to leapfrog beyond the other creatures. As
the Bible puts it, “The man gave names to all the cattle, and to the birds of the sky,
and to every beast of the field” while even the most linguistically gifted animals can
muster little more language than “Give me bananas,” “D’oh! Snake!” and “Hey
there, pal!” Echoing the Bible’s words, the 17th-century philosopher René Descartes
wrote that language is the mental function that sets us apart from all other beasts
and is “the sole sign and only certain mark of thought hidden and wrapped up in
the body” (Figure 10.1).
Today, scientific opinion continues to give the same prominence to language
that our forebears did, recognizing it as a crucial cornerstone of human mental life.
380 chapter 10 PLANGUAGEO
Armed with language, we not only can name all the things and creatures around us.
We can transcend the here-and-now that surrounds and confines the mentality of all
other animals.We can build bridges between the actual and the impossible; the concrete
and the abstract; the physical and the mental; the past, present, and future; the
ordinary and the sublime and, last but not least, with words and sentences we fashion
a mental bridge between your brain and mine.Going on to recraft our language into
squiggles and scratches on clay or stone or paper, we can store our thoughts forever,
sending them down through time to generations of humankind as yet unborn.
In these ways and more, language obviously serves the crucial purpose of conveying
information and ideas from person to person and from generation to generation.
Yet the role of language in human life lies yet deeper than this. Conversation
is embedded in the fundamental social fabric of our species’ existence, starting to
show itself even in infants a few months old and thus too young to sit up unaided
or feed themselves, no less to understand any meaningful word. All the same, these
smallest members of the human race have the rudimentary rhythms and tones of
language stored in their genes, and so they happily babble and coo away their days.
And their adult caretakers babble quite meaninglessly in return as the family and
community forge social bonds using the sounds of language as a central medium.
As Charles Darwin writes, language is “the sweet music of our species,” the lifelong
vehicle of our sociality as well as the transmission medium for our deepest
thoughts, beliefs, and ideas. Humans have often been defined as “the creatures who
think.” One might as justly define them as “the creatures who gossip” (or who text,
or who tweet).
In this chapter, we describe how languages are organized mentally and how they are
learned.We begin with an overview of language structure, for our species has developed
a rich computational system to serve its communicative needs.
THE BUILDING BLOCKS OF LANGUAGE
Languages consist of a hierarchy of unit types, which combine and recombine to form
higher and higher level categories so that, with a relatively small number of basic units,
each person can express and understand innumerable new thoughts. At the bottom are
the units of sound such as c, t, and a, which combine into such words as cat, act, and
tact. These words combine in turn into such phrases as a fat cat, and the phrases then
combine into such sentences as A fat cat acts with tact and That’s the act of a tacky cat.
(Figure 10.2 illustrates this hierarchy of linguistic categories.) We now take up each of
these levels of organization in turn.
The Sound Units
To speak, we force a column of air up from the lungs and out through the mouth, while
simultaneously moving the various parts of the vocal apparatus from one position to
another (Figure 10.3). Each of these movements shapes the column of moving air and
thus changes the sound produced. The human speech apparatus can emit hundreds of
different speech sounds clearly and reliably, but each language makes systematic use of
10.1 Adam gives names to the animals
The belief that knowledge of word meanings
sets humans above animals goes back
to antiquity. An example is the biblical tale,
illustrated in this painting by William Blake,
in which Adam assigns names to the animals.
According to some ancient legends,
this act established Adam’s intellectual
superiority over all creation, including even
the angels.
Dental
consonant
region
Lips
Palate
Tongue
Vocal cords
(larynx)
Soft palate
Nasal cavity
Oral cavity
10.3 The human vocal tract Speech is produced
by air flow from the lungs that passes
through the larynx (popularly called the voice
box) containing the vocal cords and from
there through the oral and nasal cavities,
which together make up the vocal tract.
Different vowels are created by movements of
the lips and tongue, which change the size and
shape of the vocal cavity. Consonants are produced
by various articulatory movements that
temporarily obstruct the air flow through the
vocal tract.
PThe Building Blocks of LanguageO 381
only a small number of these physical possibilities. For example, consider the English
word bus, which can be pronounced with more or less of a hiss in the s. This sound difference,
though audible, is irrelevant to the English-language listener,
who interprets what was heard to mean “a large vehicle” in either case.
But some sound distinctions do matter, for they signal differences in
meaning. Thus, neither butt nor fuss will be taken to mean “a large vehicle.”
This suggests that the distinctions among s, f, and t sounds are relevant
to the perception of English, while the difference in hiss duration
is not. The sound categories that matter in a language are called its
phonemes. English uses about 40 different phonemes.* Other languages
select their own sets. For instance,German uses certain guttural
sounds that are never heard in English, and French uses some vowels
that are different from the English ones, making trouble for Americans
who are trying to order le veau or le boeuf in Parisian restaurants
(Ladefoged & Maddieson, 1996; Poeppel & Hackl, 2007).
Not every phoneme sequence occurs in every language. Sometimes
these gaps are accidental. For instance, it just so happens that there is
no English word pilk. But other gaps are systematic effects of the language
design. As an illustration, could a new breakfast food be called Pritos?
How about Glitos or Tlitos? Each of these would be a new word in English, and
all can be pronounced, but one seems wrong: Tlitos. English speakers sense that
English words never start with tl, even though this phoneme sequence is perfectly
acceptable in the middle of a word (as in motley or battling). So the new breakfast food
will be marketed as tasty, crunchy Pritos or Glitos. Either of these two names will do, but
Tlitos is out of the question. The restriction against tl beginnings is not a restriction on
what human tongues and ears can do. For instance, one Northwest Indian language is
named Tlingit, obviously by people who are perfectly willing to have words begin with
tl. This shows that the restriction is a fact about English specifically. Few of us are conscious
of this pattern, but we have learned it and similar patterns exceedingly well, and
we honor them in our actual language use.
Languages differ from one another in several other ways at the level of sound. There
are marked differences in the rhythm in which the successive syllables occur, and
*The English alphabet provides only 26 symbols (letters) to write these 40 phonemes, and so often the same symbol
is used for more than one phoneme. Thus, for example, the letter O stands for two different phonemes in hot and
cold, an “ah” sound and an “oh” sound. This fact—that the written and spoken symbols do not quite match—
contributes to the difficulty of learning how to read English.
The umpires talked to the players
The umpires talked to the players
The umpire s talk ed to the play er s
t u w z t z pley re
MORPHEME
PHONEME
PHRASE
WORD
SENTENCE
mpayr v c t k e i
The umpires talked to the players
10.2 The hierarchy of linguistic units
Language is hierarchical, with sentences at
the top. Sentences are composed of phrases,
which in turn are composed of words. Words
are made up of morphemes, the smallest
units of language that carry meaning. The
units of sound that compose morphemes are
called phonemes. Equivalent gestural units
exist for signed languages.
phoneme The smallest significant unit
of sound in a language. Alphabetic characters
roughly correspond to phonemes
(e.g., apt, tap, and pat are all made up of
the same phonemes).
382 chapter 10 PLANGUAGEO
differences as well in the use and patterning of stress (or accent) and tone (or pitch).
For instance, in languages such as Mandarin Chinese or Igbo, two words that consist
of the same phoneme sequence, but that differ in tone, can mean entirely different
things. Languages also differ in how the phonemes can occur together within syllables.
Some languages, such as Hawaiian and Japanese, regularly alternate a single consonant
with a single vowel. Thus, we can recognize words like Toyota and origami as “sounding
Japanese” when they come into common English usage. In contrast, syllables with two
or three consonants at their beginning and end are common in English; for example,
flasks or strengths.
Speech can be understood at rates of up to about 250 words per minute. The normal
rate is closer to 180 words per minute, which converts to about 15 phonemes per second.
These phonemes are usually fired off in a continuous stream, without gaps or
silences in between the words (Figure 10.4). This is true for phonemes within a single
word and also for words within a phrase, so that sometimes it is hard to know whether
one is hearing “that great abbey” versus “that gray tabby” or “The sky is falling” versus
“This guy is falling” (Levelt, 1989; Liberman, Cooper, Shankweiler, & Studdert-
Kennedy, 1967; see Figure 10.5).
Morphemes and Words
At the next level of the linguistic hierarchy (see Figure 10.2), fixed sequences of
phonemes and syllables are joined together into morphemes. The morphemes are the
smallest language units that carry bits of meaning. Examples of morphemes are talk,
tree, and the -ed morpheme that marks the past tense. Some words consist of a single
morpheme, such as and, man, and bake, while others contain more than one, for example,
waterfall, talked, and downstairs.
CONTENT MORPHEMES AND FUNCTION MORPHEMES
Morphemes such as bake and man that carry the main burden of meaning are called
content morphemes. The morphemes that not only add details to the meaning (such
as plurality or tense) but also serve various grammatical purposes (such as the suffixes
-ed and -ness and the connecting words and and which) are called function morphemes.
This distinction of morpheme type, existing in all languages, is reflected in the sound
characteristics of the language, so that content and function morphemes are pronounced
somewhat differently, with the function words more likely to be shorter and
unstressed (Shi,Morgan, & Allopenna, 1998). The intermixing of function and content
morphemes in sentences is an important factor giving speech its rhythmic cadence of
strong and weak beats (Nespor, Peña, & Mehler, 2003). Some function morphemes
cannot stand alone and must be joined with others to make up a complex word. We
mentioned -ed; other examples are -er (meaning “one who”) and -s (meaning “more
than one”). When these are joined with the morpheme bake (meaning “to cook by slow
ThereAre NoS ilen ces Bet weenWord s
10.4 The actual sound pattern of speech
This figure shows the moment-by-moment
sound amplitudes produced by a speaker
uttering the sentence There are no silences
between words. Listeners must figure out
where one word ends and the next begins,
a process known as segmentation. This
problem is even harder for those just learning
the language, including infants (see p.
399) and adult second-language learners
as well: Because they cannot easily segment
the speech stream into its component
words, they get the subjective impression
that the foreign speech is being pronounced
“too fast.”
“Boy, he must think we’re pretty stupid
to fall for that again.”
10.5 Phoneme streams can create
ambiguity
morpheme The smallest significant
unit of meaning in a word (e.g., the word
boys has two morphemes, boy and -s).
PThe Building Blocks of LanguageO 383
heating”) into the complex word bakers (bake ! er ! s), the meaning becomes
correspondingly complex (“ones who cook by slow heating”). And once again (just as
with phonemes) there are constraints on where in the sequence each morpheme occurs.
We could not, intelligibly, say erbakes or bakeser instead of bakers.
Recordings of activity in the brain reveal that content and function morphemes are
processed in different ways during normal language activities (C. M. Brown, Hagoort,
& ter Keurs, 1999). Relatedly, in brain injury a person’s ability to utter or process
function morphemes may be compromised while the content words remain intact (the
reverse condition also occurs, though more rarely), confirming the fact that these two
types of words rely on partly different brain circuits and are sited differently in the brain
(see Chapter 3 for a discussion of aphasia).
Phrases and Sentences
Words and phrases now combine to form sentences. Once again, at this new level of
complexity, there are constraints on the permitted sequences. House the is red and Where
put you the pepper? are ungrammatical—not in keeping with the regularities of form that
characterize a particular language. One might at first glance think that the
grammaticality of a sentence is just a matter of meaningfulness—whether the sequence
of words has yielded a coherent idea or thought. But this is not so. Some word
sequences are easily interpretable, but still seem badly constructed (That infant seems
sleeping). Other sequences are not interpretable, but seem well constructed even so
(Colorless green ideas sleep peacefully). This latter sequence makes no sense (ideas neither
sleep nor are colorful; green things are not colorless), and yet is well formed in a way
that Sleep green peacefully ideas colorless is not. Thus grammaticality depends not directly
on meaning, but on conformance with some rule-like system—patterns of sentence
formation that are akin to those of the rules of arithmetic or of chess. Much as you
cannot (as a competent calculator) add 2 and 2 to yield 5 or (as a competent chess
player) move a King two squares in any direction, you cannot put the noun before the
article (as in House the is red) to yield a sentence in English. So, by analogy to chess, and
so on, the patterns describing how words and phrases can combine into sentences are
called the “rules of grammar” or “syntax.”
We should emphasize that we have not been speaking here about the “rules of
proper English” imposed on groaning children by school teachers and literary critics—
rules forbidding the use of “ain’t,” or of ending a sentence with a preposition. These latter
rules are some people’s prescriptions for how language should be (rather than how it
really is), a matter that usually is based on which dialect of the language has the most
prestige or social cachet (see Labov, 2007). In contrast, the rules of syntax that we are
discussing are the implicitly known psychological principles that organize language use
and understanding in all humans, including very young children as well as adults, and
members of unschooled societies as well as professors of literature and CEOs of major
corporations.
The study of syntax has been one of the chief concerns of linguists and psycholinguists,
with much of the discussion building from the theories of Noam Chomsky
(Chomsky, 1965, 1995; Figure 10.6). As Chomsky emphasized, this interest in the rules
governing word combination is not surprising if one wants to understand the fact that
we can say and understand a virtually unlimited number of new things, all of them “in
English.” We put our words together in ever new sentences to mean ever new things,
but we have to do so systematically or our listeners won’t be able to decipher the new
combinations.
content morpheme A morpheme that
carries the main semantic and referential
content of a sentence. In English content
morphemes are usually nouns, verbs,
adjectives, or adverbs.
function morpheme A morpheme
that, while adding such content as time,
mode, individuation, and evidentiality,
also serves a grammatical purpose (e.g.,
the suffixes -s and -er, or the connecting
words and or if).
10.6 Noam Chomsky (1928–) Noam
Chomsky is an American linguist who has
pioneered modern approaches to the study
of language. His theoretical and empirical
contributions over several decades have
underpinned the synthesis of linguistics,
computer science, and psychology that
today is known as cognitive science.
Chomsky also is widely known for commentary
on social and political issues.
rules of syntax (or grammar) The
regular principles governing how words
can be assembled into sentences.
384 chapter 10 PLANGUAGEO
THE BASICS OF SYNTACTIC ORGANIZATION
Consider the simple sentence The zebra bit the giraffe. It consists of two major subparts
or phrases, a noun phrase (the zebra) and a verb phrase (bit the giraffe). Linguists depict
this partitioning of the sentence by means of a tree diagram, so called because of its
branching appearance:
Sentence
noun phrase verb phrase
This notation is a useful way of showing that individual sentences comprise a
hierarchy of structures (as in Figure 10.2). Each sentence can be broken down into
phrases, and these phrases into smaller phrases. Thus, our verb phrase redivides as a
verb (bit) and a noun phrase (the giraffe).
verb phrase
verb noun phrase
These subphrases in turn break down into the component words and morphemes.
The descending branches of the tree correspond to the smaller and smaller units of
sentence structure. The whole tree structure is called a phrase structure description
(shown as Figure 10.7).
The phrase structure description is a compact way of describing our implicit
knowledge of how sentences are organized. Notice that recurrent labels in these trees
reflect the fact that phrases are organized in the same way regardless of where they
occur. For example, there are two instances of the label “noun phrase” in Figure 10.7.
Each English noun phrase (except for pronouns and proper names) follows the same
pattern whether it is at the start, middle, or end of a sentence: Articles such as a and the
come first; any adjectives come next; then the noun. This patterning accounts for why
anyone who rejects a sentence like The shirt green fit him well as a grammatical sentence
of English is guaranteed also to reject Albert is wearing the shirt green and They bought the
shirt green at Walmart on Thursday. In essence, then, phrase structure rules define groups
of words as modules that can be plugged in anywhere that the sentence calls for a
phrase of the specified type. Other languages choose wholly or partly different
giraffe
Noun
Noun phrase
Verb phrase
Sentence
bit the
Article
Verb
Noun phrase
Article Noun
the zebra
10.7 The structure of the sentence The zebra bit the
giraffe This tree diagram is called a phrase structure
description because it shows how the sentence can be
analyzed into phrase units. Notice particularly that
there are two noun phrases in this sentence. The first
one (the zebra) is the subject of this sentence. The second
one (the giraffe) is inside the verb phrase (bit the
giraffe). A description of this kind also shows the word
class types (e.g., article, noun, verb) of which each
phrase consists. Finally, the tree shows the words of the
sentence (the bottom row in the tree).
tree diagram A geometric representation
of the structure of a sentence. Its
nodes are labeled with phrase- (e.g.,
noun phrase) and word-class (e.g., adjective)
category names, and the descending
branches indicate relationships
among these categories.
phrase structure description A tree
diagram or labeled bracketing that
shows the hierarchical structure of a
sentence.
PHow Language Conveys MeaningO 385
orderings of words inside the phrase (e.g., French la chemise verte) and of phrases
within the sentence, but they make their phrase structure choices just as regularly and
systematically as does English.
Because the phrase structure of a sentence is its fundamental organizing principle,
anything that conforms to or reveals this structure will aid the listener during the rapid
process of understanding a sentence, and anything that obscures or complicates the
phrase structure will make comprehension that much more difficult. To illustrate, one
investigator asked listeners to memorize strings of nonsense words that they heard spoken.
Some of the strings had no discernible structure at all, for example, yig wur vum rix
hom im jag miv.Other strings also included various function morphemes, for example, the
yigs wur vumly rixing hom im jagest miv.One might think that sequences of the second type
would be harder than the first to memorize, for they are longer. But the opposite is true.
The function morphemes allowed the listeners to organize the sequence as a phrase
structure, and these structured sequences were appreciably easier to remember and
repeat (W. Epstein, 1961). Figure 10.8 shows that phrase structure organization facilitates
reading much as it does listening.
HOW LANGUAGE CONVEYS MEANING
So far, our survey of language has concentrated attention on the forms of language.
Now we turn to the topic of meaning. As we shall see, structure and meaning crucially
link together in the linguistic organization of thought.
The Meanings of Words
Word meanings are of many different kinds. Some words such as Madonna and
Batman describe individuals in the real and imaginary worlds; others such as dog and
unicorn are more general and describe categories of things. Yet other words describe
substances (water, Kryptonite), properties (green, imaginary), relations (similar, uncle),
quantities (some, zillions), actions (run, transform), states of mind (knowing, hoping) or
being (am, seem), and manners of doing (carefully, musically). A moment’s thought
reveals that the type of meaning is correlated with the so-called parts of speech, with
things and stuff generally labeled by nouns, acts and states by verbs, properties by
adjectives, and manners by adverbs. As can be expected with any informally evolving
and changing system like a human language, these form-to-meaning correlations are
not perfect and sometimes the exceptions can be striking. For instance, it is just an
arbitrary fact, without semantic explanation, that in present-day English the word
thunder can appear as either a noun or a verb (Thunder frightens my dog; The king thunders
out his commands to the peasants) whereas lightning is a noun only (Lightning frightens
my dog sounds fine, but The king lightnings down his commands to the peasants sounds
ungrammatical).
Despite the fact that the form-meanings correlations are imperfect, they are nevertheless
strong enough so that both children and adults successfully use form class
(noun, verb, etc.) as a clue to the meanings of new words (R. Brown, 1957). Distinctions
among word types accord with the representation of language in the brain: For example,
words naming things (usually nouns) are retrieved from different neural systems
than words naming actions (usually verbs), probably as a result of the different function
morphemes that occur with these two word types (e.g., the plural -s occurs with
The large tomato
made
a satisfying splat
when
it hit
the floor.
The
large tomato made
a satisfying
splat when it
hit the
floor.
10.8 Phrase structure organization aids
the reader The panel on the left (blue)
shows a sentence written so that its
phrases and major words mostly appear on
their own lines of print. This makes reading
easier because the sentence has been preorganized
so that the eye can move phrase
by phrase down the page. In the panel on
the right (green), the sentence has been
rewritten so that bits of more than one
phrase often appear on a single line.
Reading is now slower and may contain
more errors because the phrasal organization
has been visually disrupted.
Tho’ a particular colour, taste,
and smell are qualities all united
together in this apple, it is easy to
perceive they are not the same,
but are at least distinguishable
from each other.
386 chapter 10 PLANGUAGEO
nouns but the past-tense -ed occurs with verbs; Tyler, Bright, Fletcher, &
Stamatakis, 2004). These distinct neural systems can be independently
compromised in brain injury, so that the person loses the use of one type
of word but still maintains the other type (Bates, Chen, Tzeng, Li, & Opie,
1991; Caramazza & Hillis, 1991).
THE DEFINITIONAL THEORY OF WORD MEANING
At first glance, the words of a language seem to be like little atoms
of meaning, each distinct from all the others. But several theories
of word meaning assert that only a handful of words in a language
describe elementary, “simple” ideas or concepts. The rest are more
like molecules: They are composites of more elementary atoms of
meaning. Thus, words like yellow and round might indeed name simple ideas
or concepts, but other words seem more complex: For example, the words canary and
banana involve not only yellowness but other elements as well (in these cases, animal
and fruit, respectively) (Hume, 1739; Jackendoff, 2002; Katz & Fodor, 1963; Figure
10.9).
These observations are central to a definitional theory of word meaning, which
states that words are represented in our minds much as they are in ordinary dictionaries
(Figure 10.10). According to this theory, each word can be understood as a bundle
of meaning atoms, or semantic features. In a dictionary, for example, a bachelor would
be defined as “an adult human male who has never married.” The psychological representation
of bachelor in our brains according to the definitional theory of meaning is
much the same: The full meaning of each word is a set of semantic atoms that are essential
for membership in the category named by the word. Thus, to continue with the
same example, bachelor is composed of the set of semantic features [single], [human],
[adult], and [male]. These features are individually necessary for bachelorhood and so,
if some creature is missing any one of them (e.g., if the creature is married, or is an
adult male duck), it could not correctly be called “a bachelor.” And this set of features is
also jointly sufficient for bachelorhood,
regardless of other traits: Some man may
be tall or short, flirtatious or shy, but still
can correctly be called a bachelor. The theory
thus describes the boundary conditions
for bachelorhood, and in so doing
would account for how we identify and
label those who are (and are not) bachelors
when we encounter them.
The definitional theory of meaning
also describes many other important facts
about how words seem to be related to
each other: Words that share features are
to that extent predicted to be similar in
meaning (wicked-evil); words with single
opposed features are antonyms (wickedgood);
words that share no features
(wicked-turqoise) are unrelated in meaning.
The feature similarities also allow us
to identify clusters of words—for exam-
10.9 The definitional theory of meaning
applied to the delicious complexity of
apples David Hume (1711–1776), the great
British Empiricist philosopher, was among
the first to claim that most of our concepts
(in this example, [apple]) are complex, constructed
by putting together simpler concepts
such as [red], [round], and [sweet].
10.10 Can a white rose be red? The
Queen had ordered the gardeners to plant
a red rose bush, but they planted a white
one by mistake. They are now trying to
repair their error by painting the white
roses red. On the definitional theory of
meaning, this seems reasonable enough.
For the expressions red rose bush and white
rose bush differ by only a single feature—
[red] versus [white]. But if so, why are the
gardeners so terrified that the Queen will
discover what they did? (From Lewis
Carroll’s Alice in Wonderland)
definitional theory of word meaning
The theory that mental representations
of word meanings consist of a necessary
and sufficient set of semantic features.
The representation of apple, for example,
might be [round], [edible], [sweet], [red],
[juicy].
semantic feature A basic semantic
category or concept that cannot be
decomposed into smaller or less inclusive
categories. According to several strict
theories (e.g., Hume, 1739), the basic
features are all sensory-perceptual.
PHow Language Conveys MeaningO 387
ple, bachelor, uncle, brother, gander, and stallion—by all being items that share the feature
of [maleness].*
Summarizing, then, the proposal is that we carry a semantic-feature definition in
our heads for each word in our vocabulary. These features allow us to recognize new
instances of each category, to understand how words are meaningfully related to each
other, and to understand the sentences of which the words are the component parts.
THE PROTOTYPE THEORY OF MEANING
The definitional theory faces several problems. For one thing, it is surprisingly hard to
come up with definitions that cover all the uses of words. Consider for example the
(proposed) definition of bird in Figure 10.11. This definition seems promising, but, in
fact, not all birds are feathered (neither baby birds nor plucked birds have feathers, but
still they are birds). The author of the dictionary definition in the figure acknowledges
this problem by hedging on the feathers issue, writing “more or less completely
covered with feathers.” And the picture helps in some ways, filling in what the words
miss, but notice that the picture is far too particular to describe the range of real
birds; it hardly seems appropriate for the emus or the albatrosses (Fodor, 1983;
G. L. Murphy, 2002).
A related problem is that some members of a meaning category appear to exemplify
that category better than others do. Thus, a German Shepherd strikes us as a more
typical dog than a Pekinese, and an armchair is somehow a better example of furniture
than is a reading lamp. This typicality difference is at odds with the analysis we
have described thus far, whose aim was to specify the necessary and sufficient attributes
that define a concept. A dictionary-type definition is meant to locate the boundaries
of a category, so that each case is either inside the boundary (and thus a member
of the category) or outside (and thus not a member). But this simple in-or-out
division seems not to capture the intuition that some category members are “better”
than others.
In general, the definitional theory fails even to pick out all and only the category
members as it was designed to do. Returning to the example with which we began: Are
there really semantic features that characterize all birds and that characterize birds
only? One might think that being able to fly is a feature of all birds, but it is not.
(Ostriches can’t fly.) And not everything that lays eggs (turtles), or flies (airplanes,
helicopters), or has feathers (hats, quilts, quill pens) is a bird. Besides, more than half
the birds don’t lay eggs at all (the babies and the males). With all these exceptions in
mind, perhaps it is wrong to suppose that we can ever find a set of necessary and sufficient
features for the concept of bird (Figure 10.12). But if not, then the definitional theory
is not correct.
Objections like these have led many investigators to reject definitional theory and to
argue for an alternative approach to the mental representation of concepts, called prototype
theory (Medin, Goldstone, & Gentner, 1993; Rosch, 1973b; E. E. Smith &
*It is important to distinguish between the word and its semantic features. Thus, [male] may be a semantic feature
or atom that constitutes part of the meaning of such words as stallion and brother. But there is also a word male. It is
the kind of word that consists of only the single semantic feature [male]. At a lower level of language, a related phenomenon
exists. The English indefinite article a is a word (the one that appears in the phrase a cat), but it is also a
phoneme. That is, a is the rare case of a word that, at the level of sound, contains only one phoneme rather than a
sequence of phonemes. In the same sense, male is the relatively rare case, according to definitional theory, of a word
that contains only a single semantic feature, [male].
10.11 Is this the entry for bird in your
mental dictionary? “bird . . . n. . . . [ME
brid, bird, fr. OE bridd] . . . 2: Any of a class
(Aves) of warm-blooded vertebrates distinguished
by having the body more or less
completely covered with feathers and the
forelimbs modified as wings. . . . “bird 2
(kingfisher): 1 crest, 2 crown, 3 bill, 4
throat, 5 auricular region, 6 breast, 7
scapulars, 8 abdomen, 9 tarsus, 10 upper
wing coverts, 11 primaries, 12 secondaries,
13 rectrix, 14 tail” (Merriam-Webster’s
Collegiate Dictionary, 11th ed.).
prototype theory A theory in which concepts
orword meanings are formed around
average ortypical values.
(A) (B)
10.12 Diversity within categories These
creatures differ in many regards, but both are
instances of the category bird. The enormous
diversity of instances within categories is one
reason why categories are difficult to define.
The robin (A) is a prototypical bird for temperate-
zone dwellers. The ostrich (B) is a nonprototypical
bird even in its native habitats because it
is way bigger than any average-sized bird and it
can’t even fly.
388 chapter 10 PLANGUAGEO
Medin, 1981; E. E. Smith, Osherson, Rips, & Keane, 1988). According to prototype
theory, the meaning of many words is still described as a set of component features, but
not a necessary and sufficient set of them. Instead, the concept is held together in a
family resemblance structure (Wittgenstein, 1953). Consider the ways that members
of a family resemble each other. Joe may look like his father to the extent that he has his
eyes; he may look like his mother by virtue of his prominent chin. His sister Sue may
look like her father because she has his nose, and she may smile just like her mother.
But Joe and Sue may have no feature in common (he has his grandfather’s nose and she
has Aunt Fanny’s eyes), so the two of them do not look alike at all. Even so, they are
both easily recognized as members of the family, for they each bear some resemblance
to their parents (Figure 10.13). Some members of the family may have more of these features
than others do and thus are more “prototypical” or central for the category.
Informally, such central members are often called “typical Smiths,” or “perfect
Schwartzes.”
According to some psychologists, we carry in memory such mental prototypes for
each of our concepts—a prototypical bird, a prototypical chair, and so on (Barselou,
1985;Gentner,1983;Goldstone, Lippa,& Shiffrin, 2001). Each prototype provides something
like a mental average of all the examples of the concept that we have encountered.
In the case of birds, people in the mainland United States have seen far more robins
than penguins. As a result, something that resembles a robin will be stored in their
memory system and will then be associated with the word bird. When the person later
sees a new object, she will judge it to be a bird to the extent that it resembles the prototype
in some way. A sparrow resembles it in many ways and so is judged to be a “good”
bird; a penguin resembles it just a little and hence is a “marginal” bird; a rowboat
resembles it not at all and hence is judged to be no bird.
Support for the prototype view comes from numerous studies. When people are
asked to come up with examples of some category, they generally first produce instances
that are close to the prototype (e.g., robins rather than ostriches). People also respond
“yes” more quickly when asked about the truth of the sentence A robin is a bird than of
An ostrich is a bird. This is perfectly sensible. A robin resembles the bird prototype and
so the similarity is readily discerned, allowing a fast response. For an ostrich, one must
spend a moment searching for its relatively few birdy features, so verification is slower
(Rosch, 1978; Tversky, 1977).
COMBINING DEFINITIONAL AND PROTOTYPE THEORIES
The prototype view helps us understand why a spindle-shaped trout seems fishier
than a long, skinny seahorse, but the definitional theory seems important if we are to
explain why a whale, which looks suspiciously like a fish, isn’t one at all while a
seahorse is a fish despite its shape (Connolly, Fodor, Gleitman, & Gleitman, 2007;
Fodor & Lepore, 1996). Perhaps we can combine both views of meaning rather than
choosing between them (Armstrong, Gleitman, & Gleitman, 1983).
Consider the word grandmother. For this term, there are necessary and sufficient features,
so here the definitional theory seems just right: A grandmother is necessarily a
female parent of a parent. But there may also be a prototype: A really grandmotherly
grandmother is a woman who is old and gray, has a kindly twinkle in her eye, and bakes
delicious cookies. When we say that someone is grandmotherly,we are surely referring to
the prototypical attributes of grandmothers, not to genealogy. And, in many circumstances
we use this prototype rather than the definition. For example, we are likely to
rely on our grandmother prototype for picking a grandmother out of a crowd of people
and for predicting what someone’s grandmother will be like, even though such predic-
1
2
3
8
7
6
5
9 4
10.13 The Smith brothers and their family
resemblance The Smith brothers are
related through family resemblance, though
no two brothers share all features. The one
who has the greatest number of the family
attributes is the most prototypical. In the
example, it is Brother 9 who has all the family
features: brown hair, large ears, large
nose, moustache, and eyeglasses.
family resemblance structure An
overlapping set of semantic features
shared by members of a category, such
that no members of the category need
to have all of the features but all members
have at least one of them.
prototype The typical ormost familiar
example of a category (e.g., a robin is a
prototypical bird formany Americans but
an auk might be the prototype for
Laplanders).
Courtesy Sharon Armstrong
PHow Language Conveys MeaningO 389
tions are fallible (see Figure 10.14).We may also metaphorically call
an individual “grandmotherly” if she is childless but has the prototypical
gray-and-twinkly attributes of most—though not all—definitional
grandmothers (Gleitman, Armstrong, & Connolly, in press;
Landau, 1982).
It appears, therefore, that people have two partly independent
mental representations of most if not all words. Though there are
strict (necessary and sufficient) criteria for being a bachelor, we all
know what is intended when someone meeting these criteria is ironically
described as “not your typical bachelor” or metaphorically called
“a married bachelor.”
WORD MEANINGS IN “FOLK THEORIES”
OF THE WORLD
Our understanding of words is embedded in a web of beliefs that is broader than either
the theory of definitions or the theory of prototypes can describe (Medin, Atran, Cox,
Coley,& Proffitt, 2006).We seem to have well-developed ideas (sometimes called “folk
theories”) of why objects or properties are the way they are, and therefore how they
could and could not change without becoming something altogether different (Keil,
1989; Locke, 1690). For instance, lawnmowers that are now made out of steel and plastics
might one day be constructed from the kinds of exotic metals that today are only
used in spacecraft. But some materials such as shaving cream or ice could never be considered
for lawnmowers because they could not support the essential function of such
a device.We therefore confidently say, A lawnmower could be made out of wood or titanium,
but cannot be made of ice. This statement does not flow from a definition (which presumably
would mention neither wood nor ice), and also cannot be easily derived from the
prototype (since wood and ice lawnmowers would both be very distant from the prototype).
No more does the statement derive from our experience, because we have never
seen a (failed) lawnmower made of ice. Rather, this statement (and many other
thoughts about this concept) reflects the fact that we hold a nonconscious mental
“theory” of what makes a lawnmower a lawnmower, and this theory guides us in many
aspects of our thinking about lawnmowers.
The Meanings of Sentences
Sentences have meanings too, over and above the meanings of the words they contain.
This is obvious from the fact that two sentences can be composed of all and only the
same words and yet be meaningfully distinct. For example, The giraffe bit the zebra and
The zebra bit the giraffe describe different events, a meaning difference of some importance,
at least to the zebra and the giraffe.
The typical sentence introduces some topic (the subject of the sentence) and then
makes some comment, or offers some information, about that topic (the predicate).
Thus, when we say, The giraffe bit the zebra, we introduce the giraffe as the topic, and
then we propose or predicate of the giraffe that it bit the zebra. Accordingly, sentence
meanings are often called propositions. In effect, a simple sentence describes a miniature
drama in which the verb is the action and the nouns are the performers, each
playing a different semantic role. In The zebra bit the giraffe, the zebra plays the role of
doer or agent who causes or instigates the action, the giraffe is the done-to—the thing
affected by the action, and biting is the action itself. The job of a listener who wants to
10.14 Prototypes and definitions Tyler
Perry playing the role of Madea might
resemble the typical grandmother, but as a
male, he is surely not a real grandmother.
In contrast, Goldie Hawn is far from the
prototype but is, in reality, a grandmother.
subject noun phrase The noun phrase
immediately descending from the root of
the sentence tree. In simple English sentences,
this noun phrase usually plays
the semantic role of actor or agent of the
action.
predicate verb phrase The verb
phrase immediately descending from the
root of the sentence tree. In simple
English sentences, this verb phrase usually
expresses the action or state of the
agent or actor.
proposition A predicate-argument
structure. In a sentence, the verb is the
predicated act or state and the noun
phrases are its arguments, playing various
semantic roles.
semantic role The part that each
phrase plays in the “who did what to
whom” drama described by a sentence.
One word takes the role of being the
cause of the action, another, its effect,
and so on.
390 chapter 10 PLANGUAGEO
understand a sentence, then, is to determine which actors are portraying the various
roles and what the plot (the action) is; that is, to decide on the basis of sentence
structure who did what to whom.
For the very simplest sentences of a language, their grammatical structure links up
rather directly to the semantics of who-did-what-to-whom (M. C. Baker, 2001;
Grimshaw, 1990; Jackendoff, 2002). To get a feel for how this system works, see
Figure 10.15A, which shows the phrase structure of the zebra sentence.We can “read”
the semantic roles off of this syntactic tree by attending to its geometry, as shown in
Figure 10.15B. The doer of the action is the noun phrase that branches directly from the
root of the tree (a position known as “the sentence subject,” namely, the zebra). The
“done-to” is the noun phrase that branches off of the verb phrase (a position known as
“the direct object,” namely, the giraffe). So different noun phrases in the syntactic structure
have different semantic roles. More complex sentences of the language will encode
yet further semantic roles and relations, for example, The nanny (do-er) feeds (act) some
soup (done-to, or thing affected) to the baby (recipient) with a spoon (instrument).
Summarizing, the position of the words and phrases in this simple sentence of
English is providing the semantic role information to the listener. Serialization is of central
importance in this regard in English and many other languages. However, there is
another type of information, used in the English pronoun system, that can signal the
semantic roles without regard to serial position. For instance, the sentences He had
always admired her intelligence and Her intelligence is what he had always admired mean the
same thing. It is the particular form of a pronoun (he versus him, she versus her) that
assigns the semantic roles in this case.Many languages use something analogous to our
pronoun system as the primary means for signaling semantic roles, for nouns as well as
pronouns. They do this with case markers, which usually occur as function morphemes.
When case markers occur regularly in a language, the word order itself can be much more
flexible than it is in English. In Finnish, for example, the words meaning zebra and giraffe
change their serial order in Seepra puri kirahvia and Kirahvia puri seepra, but in either
order it is the giraffe (kirahvia) who needs the medical attention. It is the suffix -a (rather
than -ia) that in both sentences identifies the zebra as the aggressor in this battle.
COMPLEX SENTENCE MEANINGS
In very simple sentences, as we have seen, the phrase structure straightforwardly
reflects the propositional meaning of who-did-what-to-whom. But the sentences we
encounter in everyday conversation are usually much more complicated than these first
examples. Many factors contribute to complexity. Sometimes we reorder the phrases so
as to emphasize aspects of the scene other than the doer (It was the giraffe who got bitten
by the zebra). Sometimes we wish to question (Who bit the giraffe?) or command (Bite that
giraffe!) rather than merely comment on the passing scene. And often we wish to
10.15 From structure to meaning (A) The
structure of the sentence The zebra bit the
giraffe (simplified); (B) The drama of whodid-
what-to-whom as reconstructed by the
listener from the structure in (A).
case marker A word or affix that indicates
the semantic role played by some
noun phrase in a sentence.
(A) (B)
the zebra bit the giraffe
Verb Noun phrase
Noun phrase Verb phrase
Sentence
the zebra bit the giraffe
Action Done-to
Doer Predicate
Proposition
PHow Language Conveys MeaningO 391
express our attitudes (beliefs, hopes, and so forth) toward certain events (I was delighted
to hear that the zebra bit the giraffe), or to relate one proposition to another, and so will
utter two or more of them in the same sentence (The zebra that arrived from Kenya bit
the giraffe). All this added complexity of meaning is mirrored by corresponding complexities
in the sentence structures themselves.
Most ordinary language users fluently utter, write, and understand many sentences
50, 100, or more morphemes in length. The example below is from a blogger writing
about ordering beauty supplies on line—so we can hardly protest that it was the
unusual creation of some linguistic Einstein or literary giant:
However, I didn’t know how to order it and came across your site where you found free trial
supplies which is great because i dont want to pay for something i didnt know worked
This author has managed to cram nine verbs in four different tenses into an informal
but intricate grammatical narrative. How did he or she manage to do it? Surely not
by memorizing superficial recipes like “an English sentence can end with two verbs in
a row” but rather by nonconsciously appreciating combinatorial regularities of enormous
generality and power that build up sentence units like acrobats’ pyramids. The
complex sentences are constructed by reusing the same smallish set of syntax rules that
formed the simple sentences, but tying them all together using function morphemes for
the nails and glue (Chomsky, 1959, 1981a; Z. Harris, 1951; Joshi, 2002).
AMBIGUITY IN WORDS AND SENTENCES
Not only do sentences often become complex. Very often a sentence can be interpreted
more than one way: It is ambiguous. Sometimes, the ambiguity depends only on one
word having two or more meanings (that is, having more than one “entry” in our mental
dictionaries); examples can be seen in such newspaper headlines as Children’s Stools
Useful for Garden Work; Red Tape Holds up Bridge; Prostitutes Appeal to Pope. In many cases,
though, the ambiguity depends on structure: in particular, on alternate ways that words
are grouped together in the syntactic tree (Police Are Ordered to Stop Drinking on Campus;
Oil Given Free to Customers in Glass Bottles). There is a big difference, after all, between
police who [stop drinking] [on campus] and those who [stop] [drinking on campus].*
Such structural ambiguity is pervasive in everyday speech and writing, even with
short and apparently simple sentences. For instance, Smoking cigarettes can be dangerous
could be a warning that to inhale smoke could harm your health, or a warning that if
you leave your butt smoldering in an ashtray, your house might burn down.
How We Understand
How do listeners decipher the drama of who-did-what-to-whom from the myriad complex
and ambiguous sentence forms in which this drama can be expressed? A major portion
of the answer lies in a complex, rapid, nonconscious processing system churning
away to recover the structure—and hence the semantic roles—as the speaker’s utterance
arrives word by word at the listener’s ear (Marcus, 2001; Savova et al., 2007; Tanenhaus
& Trueswell, 2006). To get a hint of how this system operates, notice first that the various
function morphemes in speech help mark the boundaries between phrases and
propositions (for instance, but or and) and reveal the roles of various content words even
when their order changes. For instance, when we reorder the phrases in a so-called
*Notice that the verbs cease or prevent could have been used instead of stop in this headline, with each of these two
choices removing the ambiguity in a different way.
392 chapter 10 PLANGUAGEO
passive-voice sentence, we say, The cheese was eaten by the mouse instead of The mouse ate
the cheese. The telltale morphemes -en and by cue the fact that the done-to rather than the
do-er has become the subject (Bever, 1970). Sometimes the rhythmic structure of speech
(or the hyphen punctuation in written English) helps to disambiguate the utterance, as
in the distinction between a black bird-house and a black-bird house (L. R. Gleitman & H.
Gleitman, 1970; Snedeker & Trueswell, 2003; see Figure 10.16). Listeners also are sensitive
to many clues from background knowledge and plausibility that go beyond syntax to
discern the real communicative intents of speakers.We next discuss some examples of
how these kinds of clues work together to account for the remarkable speed and accuracy
of human language comprehension despite the apparent complexity and ambiguity of
the task that the listener faces.
THE FREQUENCY WITH WHICH THINGS HAPPEN
Often a listener’s interpretation of a sentence is guided by background knowledge,
knowledge that indicates the wild implausibility of one interpretation of an otherwise
ambiguous sentence (G. Altmann & Steedman, 1988; Sedivy, Tanenhaus, Chambers, &
Carlson, 1999). For example, no sane reader is in doubt over the punishment meted out
to the perpetrator after seeing the headline Drunk Gets Six Months in Violin Case (Pinker,
1994). But in less extreme cases, the correct interpretation is not immediately obvious.
Most of us have had the experience of being partway through hearing or reading a sentence
and realizing that somewhere we went wrong. For example, we may make a wordgrouping
error, as in reading a sentence that begins The fat people eat . . . The natural
inclination is to take the fat people as the subject noun phrase and eat as the beginning
of the verb phrase (Bever, 1970). But suppose the sentence continues:
The fat people eat accumulates on their hips and thighs.
Now one must go back and reread. (Notice that this sentence would have been much
easier if, as is certainly allowed in English, the author had placed the function word that
before the word people: The fat that people eat accumulates on their hips and thighs.) The
partial misreading (or “mishearing” in the case of spoken language) is termed a garden
path (in honor of the cliché phrase “led down the garden path,” in which someone can
be deceived without noticing it). Because of the misleading content or structure at the
beginning of the sentence, the reader is enticed toward one interpretation, but he must
then retrace his mental footsteps to find a grammatical and understandable alternative.
Psycholinguists have various ways of detecting when people are experiencing a garden
path during reading. One is to use a device that records the motion of the reader’s eyes as
they move across a page of print. Slowdowns and visible regressions of these eye movements
tell us where and when the reader has gone wrong and is rereading the passage
(MacDonald, Pearlmutter, & Seidenberg, 1994; Rayner, Carlson, & Frazier, 1983;
Trueswell, Tanenhaus,& Garnsey, 1994).Using this technique, one group of investigators
looked at the effects of plausibility on readers’ expectations of the structure they were
encountering (see Figure 10.17). Suppose that the first three words of a test sentence are
The detectives examined . . .
Participants who read these words typically assume that The detectives is the subject of
the sentence and that examined is the main verb. They therefore expect the sentence to
end with some noun phrase—for example: the evidence. As a result, they are thrown off
track when they dart their eyes forward and instead read that the sentence continues
. . . by the reporter . . .
10.16 Phrase structure influences
meaning The Queen suggests a visit to
the Mock Turtle. Upon being asked what a
Mock Turtle is, the Queen tells Alice, “It’s
the thing Mock Turtle Soup is made from.”
Lewis Carroll’s joke here is that the Queen
has grouped the words wrongly, as people
of his time and place would easily recognize.
In Victorian England [mock] [turtle
soup] was turtle soup made from veal (thus
“mock” or “ersatz” turtle soup). But if the
words are whimsically regrouped as [mock
turtle] [soup] the implication would be that
there are creatures called Mock Turtles,
and one could make soup from them.
(From Lewis Carroll’s Alice in Wonderland).
garden path A premature, false syntactic
analysis of a sentence as it is being
heard or read, which must be mentally
revised when later information within the
sentence falsifies the initial interpretation,
as in, e.g., Put the ball on the floor
into the box.
PHow Language Conveys MeaningO 393
The readers’ puzzlement is evident in their eye movements: They pause and look back
at the previous words, obviously realizing that they need to revise their notion that
examined was the main verb. After this recalculation, they continue on, putting all of the
pieces together in a new way, and so grasp the entire sentence:
The detectives examined by the reporter revealed the truth about the robbery.
The initial pause at by the reporter showed that readers had been led down the garden
path and now had to rethink what they were reading. But what was it exactly that
led the participants off course with this sentence? Was the difficulty just that passivevoice
sentences are less frequent than active-voice sentences? To find out, the experimenters
also presented sentences that began
The evidence examined by the reporter . . .
Now the participants experienced little or no difficulty, and read blithely on as the sentence
ended as it had before (. . . revealed the truth about the robbery). Why? After all, this
sentence has exactly the same structure as the one starting The detectives . . . and so,
apparently, the structure itself was not what caused the garden path in this case.
Instead, the difficulty seems to depend on the plausible semantic relations among the
words. The noun detectives is a “good subject” of verbs like examined because detectives
often do examine things—such as footprints in the garden, spots of blood on the snow,
and so on. Therefore, plausibility helps the reader to believe that the detectives in the
test sentence did the examining—thus leading the reader to the wrong interpretation.
Things go differently, though, when the sentence begins The evidence, because evidence,
of course, is not capable of examining anything. Instead, evidence is a likely object of
someone’s examination, and so a participant who has read The evidence examined . . . is
not a bit surprised that the next word that comes up is by. This is the function morpheme
that signals that a passive-voice verb form is on its way—just what the reader
expected given the meanings of the first three words of the sentence (Trueswell &
Tanenhaus, 1992).
It seems, then, that the process of understanding makes use of word meanings and
sentence structuring as mutual guides.We use the meaning of each word (detectives versus
evidence) to guide us toward the intended structure, and we use the expected structure
(active versus passive) to guess at the intended meanings of the words.
WHAT IS HAPPENING RIGHT NOW?
Humans often talk about the future, the past, and the altogether imaginary.We devour
books on antebellum societies that are now gone with the wind, and tales that speak of
10.17 Interpreting two complex sentences
(A) Here, the reporter is examining
(interviewing) the detectives to find out
about the crime. (B) Here, the reporter himself
examines the tell-tale evidence (ladder,
footsteps, drops of blood) to find out about
the crime.
(A) The detectives examined by the reporter
revealed the truth about the robbery.
(B) The evidence examined by the reporter
revealed the truth about the robbery.
394 chapter 10 PLANGUAGEO
a Voldemort universe that we hope never to experience. But much of our conversation is
focused on more immediate concerns, and in these cases the listener can often see what
is being referred to and can witness the actions being described in words. This sets up a
two-way influence—with the language we hear guiding how we perceive our surroundings,
and the surroundings in turn shaping how we interpret the heard speech.
For example, in one experiment, on viewing an array of four objects (a ball, a cake, a
toy truck, and a toy train), participants listening to the sentence Now I want you to eat
some cake turned their eyes toward the cake as soon as they heard the verb eat (Altmann
& Kamide, 1999) and before hearing cake. After all, it was unlikely that the experimenter
would be requesting the participants to ingest the toy train. In this case, the
meaning of the verb eat focused listeners’ attention on only certain aspects of the world
in view—the edible aspects!
Just as powerful are the reverse phenomena: effects of the visually observed world
on how we interpret a sentence (consider the array of toy objects in Figure 10.18A).
These include a beanie-bag frog sitting on a napkin and another napkin that has no
toy on it. When study participants look at such scenes and hear the instruction Put the
frog on the napkin into the box, most of them experience a garden path, thinking (when
they hear the first six words) that on the napkin is the destination where a frog should
next be placed. After all, the empty napkin seems a plausible destination for the frog.
But three words later (upon hearing into the box) they are forced to realize that the
intended destination is really the box and not the empty napkin after all. This doubletake
reaction is evident in the participants’ eye movements: On hearing napkin, they
look first to the empty napkin, and then look around the scene in confusion when they
hear into the box. Of course, adult participants rapidly recover from this momentary
boggle, and go on to execute the instruction correctly, picking up the frog and putting
it in the box. But the tell-tale movement of the eyes has identified the temporary misinterpretation,
a garden path.*
But now consider the array of objects in Figure 10.18B. It differs from the array in
Figure 10.18A, for now there are two frogs,only one of which is on a napkin.This has a
noticeable effect on participants’ eye movements. Now, on hearing the same instruction,
most of the participants immediately look to the frog that’s already on a napkin
when they hear napkin, and they show no subsequent confusion on hearing into the box.
*We say “adult” here because children are very poor at recovering from these garden path situations. Once they have
hit on a particular interpretation of the sentence they are hearing, they stick to that interpretation and do not mentally
consider alternatives. This rigidity is a linguistic example of young children’s lack of “cognitive control,” a matter
we will discuss when we turn to the topic of child bilingualism (Novick, Trueswell, & Thompson-Schill, 2005;
Trueswell, Sekerina, Hill, & Logrip, 1999).
10.18 The observed world influences the
interpretation of an ambiguous sentence
Study participants are asked to follow the
instruction to Put the frog on the napkin in
the box, but the start of this sentence can
be understood in two ways. Those who see
the array containing a frog sitting on a napkin
and a horse (panel A) initially interpret
on the napkin as the required destination of
the frog and so first peek at the other
(empty) napkin. Those who see the array
containing two frogs (panel B) interpret on
the napkin as specifying a particular frog
(the frog that is on a napkin). They immediately
look at and pick up this particular
frog without a garden-path peek at the
empty napkin. (A) (B)
Put the frog on the napkin in the box.
PHow Language Conveys MeaningO 395
What caused the difference in reaction? In the array of Figure 10.18A, with only one
frog, a listener does not expect the speaker to identify it further by saying the green frog
or the frog to the left or the frog on the napkin, for there would be no point in doing so.
Though such descriptions are true of that particular frog, there is no need to say so—
it is obvious which frog is being discussed, because only one is in view. When the listener
hears on the napkin, therefore, she assumes (falsely) that this is a destination, not
a further specification of the frog.
Things are different, though, with the array shown in Figure 10.18B. Now there is a
risk of confusion about which frog to move, and so listeners expect more information.
In this two-frog situation, therefore, the listener correctly assumes that on the napkin is
the needed cue to the uniquely intended frog, and so he does not wander down the
mental garden path (Crain & Steedman, 1985; Tanenhaus, Spivey-Knowlton, Eberhard,
& Sedivy, 1995; Trueswell, Sekerina, Hill, & Logrip, 1999).
CONVERSATIONAL INFERENCE: FILLING IN THE BLANKS
The actual words that pass back and forth between people are merely hints about the
thoughts that are being conveyed. In fact, talking would take just about forever if speakers
literally had to say all, only, and exactly what they meant. It is crucial, therefore, that
the communicating pair take the utterance and its context as the basis for making a
series of complicated inferences about the meaning and intent of the conversation
(P. Brown & Dell, 1987; Grice, 1975; Noveck & Sperber, 2005; Papafragou, Massey, &
Gleitman, 2006). For example, consider this exchange:
A: Do you own a Cadillac?
B: I wouldn’t own any American car.
Interpreted literally, Speaker B is refusing to answer Speaker A’s yes/no question. But
Speaker A will probably understand the response more naturally, supplying a series of
plausible inferences that would explain how her query might have prompted B’s retort.
Speaker A’s interpretation might go something like this: “Speaker B knows that I know
that a Cadillac is an American car. He’s therefore telling me that he does not own a
Cadillac in a way that both responds to my question with a no and also tells me something
else: that he dislikes all American cars.”
Such leaps from a speaker’s utterance to a listener’s interpretation are commonplace.
Listeners do not usually wait for everything to be said explicitly. On the contrary, they
often supply a chain of inferred causes and effects that were not actually contained in what
the speaker said, but that nonetheless capture what was intended (H. H. Clark, 1992).
LANGUAGE COMPREHENSION
We have seen that the process of language comprehension is marvelously complex,
influenced by syntax, semantics, the extralinguistic context, and inferential activity, all
guided by a spirit of communicative cooperation. These many factors are unconsciously
processed and integrated “on line” as the speaker fires 14 or so phonemes
(about 3 words, on average) a second toward the listener’s ear. Indeed this immediate
use of all possible cues is what sometimes sends us down the garden path with false
and often hilarious temporary misunderstandings (Grodner & Gibson, 2005). But in
the usual case, the process of understanding would be too slow and cumbersome to
sustain conversation if the mind reacted to each sentence only at its very end, after all
possible information had been delivered, word by word, to the ear. The mind thus
makes a trade-off between rate and accuracy of comprehension—the small risk of
error is compensated for by the great gain in speed of everyday understanding. When
396 chapter 10 PLANGUAGEO
we hear These missionaries are ready to eat or Will you join me in a bowl of soup, our
common sense and language skill combine in most cases to save us from drowning in
confusion (Gibson, 2006). Most of the time we don’t even consciously register the
various zany interpretations that the language “theoretically” makes available for
many sentences (Altmann & Steedman, 1988; Carpenter, Miyake, & Just, 1995; Dahan
& Tanenhaus, 2004; MacDonald, Pearlmutter, & Seidenberg, 1994; Marslen-Wilson,
1975; Tanenhaus & Trueswell, 2006).
HOW WE LEARN A LANGUAGE
Our survey of language has revealed it to be so complex that one might wonder how
mere children could acquire it. But as we will see now, not only can infants learn
language: They are vastly better at doing so than even the wisest adults. They recognize
many words before they can even walk. The rate of word learning rapidly accelerates
to about 3 a day in toddlers, to 5 or 8 or so a day in the preschool years, and to 10
to 15 words a day throughout childhood and early adolescence (P. Bloom, 2000; S.
Carey, 1978). The upshot is a vocabulary of about 10,000 words by age 5 and 65,000
or so by adulthood. Late in the second year of life, toddlers start to put the words
together into little sentences—“Throw ball!” “No mommy eat!”—making us
poignantly aware that another human mind is among us. How is this remarkable
achievement to be explained?
The Social Origins of Language Learning
Prelinguistic infants show an intense responsiveness to speech (Figure 10.19).
Neonates’ heart rate quickens or slows according to whether they hear a human
speaking in a tone that is excited or soothing, or disapproving versus approving.
Babies do not have to learn these emotive qualities of language any more than a puppy
has to learn by experience which barks or growls from other dogs are playful and
which are threatening. This was shown by recording German mothers talking to their
infants and then replaying the audiotape to babies who had heard only English or
French up until then. The recording was presented while the baby was playing with a
novel toy. When infants hear an approving German sentence uttered with its high
notes and mellow cadences, they go right on playing; but on hearing the sharp and
low-toned sounds of disapproval, though in a totally unfamiliar language, they drop
the toy like a hot potato (Fernald, 1992). Relatedly, infants prefer to look at and accept
toys from strangers who are speaking the language they have been hearing in their
own (so far very brief) lives. Remarkably, they even detect something strange if they
hear strangers speaking the native language but with a foreign accent (Kinzler, Dupoux,
& Spelke, 2007; Figure 10.20). Kindergartners, too, say they’d rather be friends with
newcomers who have familiar dialects than with other children who have foreign
accents, even if the latter look more familiar by being of the same race as the child subjects
(Kinzler, Shutts, DeJesus, & Spelke, 2009). Thus, language appears to be social
and interpersonal in its very origins (E. Bates, 1976; Mandler, 2000; Tomasello,
2008) with dialect differences serving as fundamental markers for who is closest to
oneself. In adulthood these same linguistic properties continue to lead to strong emotional
judgments about “us” versus “them” which may be decisive for social grouping
(M. C. Baker, 2001; Labov, 1972; Figure 10.21).
10.19 First communicative contact
Courtesy Charles Yang Family
PHow We Learn a LanguageO 397
10.20 SCIENTIFIC METHOD: Do infants use language differences to assign new people to
“one’s own” versus “stranger” social groups?
Method
English speaker
Silent toy offering
French speaker
1. Infants 10 months of age (who do not yet speak) watch a smiling
young woman speaking a language and dialect just like that of the
infants’ parents, or speaking an unfamiliar language or dialect.
Results: Infants more often and more quickly reach out
to grasp the toy held by the woman who had previously
spoken in the language or dialect familiar to the baby.
CONCLUSION: Language serves as an important marker
of one’s own trusted social group even in the pre-speech
period. Some commentators have speculated that language
and dialect differences evolved in our species for this same
purpose: so that we could distinguish members of our own
tribe or extended family from that of strangers even when
all are living in close proximity (Baker, 2002).
2. Subsequently, the two young women silently offer a toy to the
watching baby.
SOURCE STUDY: Kinzler, Dupoux, & Spelke, 2007
10.21 The power of an “H” A scene from the stage production
of My Fair Lady in which the cockney flower girl,
Eliza (Julie Andrews) is taught by the linguist Henry
Higgins (Rex Harrison) how to pronounce an “H” as the
British upper classes do. She thus becomes “a lady.” This
spoofs on the idea that language and dialect determine
social group.
Discovering the Building Blocks of Language
Neuroscientific findings show that infants are ready for language learning at birth or
almost immediately thereafter. One group of investigators recorded changes in the
blood flow in 2-day-old babies’ brains in the presence of linguistic stimulation. Half of
the time the babies were hearing recordings of normal human speech, and the other
half of the time they were hearing that speech played backward. Blood flow in the
398 chapter 10 PLANGUAGEO
babies’ left hemisphere increased for the normal speech but not for the backward
speech (Gervain, Macagno,Cogoi, Peña, & Mehler, 2008). Because the left hemisphere
of the brain is the major site for linguistic activity in humans, this evidence suggests
that the special responsiveness to language-like signals is already happening close to
the moment of birth (Figure 10.22).
THE RHYTHMIC FOUNDATIONS OF LANGUAGE LEARNING
Recall that languages vary in their significant sounds (phonemes and syllables), tones,
rhythms, and melodies, enough so that most of us can guess whether a speaker is uttering
Japanese or German or French speech even if we do not understand a word of any
of these languages. The amazing fact is that newborn infants can do almost as well.
Babies’ responsiveness can be measured by an ingenious method that takes advantage
of the fact that, while newborns can do very few things voluntarily, one of their earliest
talents—and pleasures—is sucking at a nipple. In one study, a nonnutritive nipple (or
“pacifier”) was connected to a recording device such that every time the baby sucked, a
bit of French speech was heard coming from a nearby loudspeaker. The 4-day-old
French babies rapidly discovered that they had the power to elicit this speech just by
sucking, and they sucked faster and faster to hear more of it. After a few minutes, however,
they apparently got bored (or habituated to the stimulus—see Chapter 6), and
therefore the sucking rate decreased. Now the experimenter switched the speech coming
from the microphone from French to English. Did these neonates notice? The
answer is yes. When the switch was made, their interest was reawakened, and they
began sucking faster and faster again (they dishabituated). To perfect the experimental
proof, the same recordings were flown to the United States, and the experiment was
repeated with 4-day-old American babies, with the same result. American newborns
also can and do discriminate between English and French speech. Indeed, by 2 months
of age, not only do infants make these discriminations, but now they become linguistically
patriotic and listen longer when their own native language is being spoken (Nazzi,
Bertoncini, & Mehler, 1998; see also Figure 10.23).
What is it about the native language that is attracting these infants’ attention at these
earliest ages? It cannot be the meanings of words, because they as yet do not know any.
Evidently the first feature that babies are picking up about their native tongue has to do
10.22 Detecting phonetic distinctions
This baby’s head is covered with a geodesic
sensor net, which picks up signals from the
brain. The baby, seated in a carrier on the
mother’s lap, faces a loudspeaker emitting
meaningless syllables, and watches a video
of moving colored objects. When repeated
spoken syllables were changed to new, different
ones, there were significant changes
in the event-related potential signals
(ERPs), showing that the baby had noticed
the change.
(A)
(B)
15
30
45
60
75
Before After
Mean number of sucking responses per minute
Minutes before and after change
in speech sound
10.23 Sucking rate and speech perception in the infant (A) An infant sucks
to hear “ba” or “ga.” (B) The graph shows the sucking rate of 4-month-olds to
“ba” or “ga.” The infants soon become habituated, and the sucking rate drops.
When a new stimulus is substituted (“ga” for “ba” and “ba” for “ga”), the infant
dishabituates and sucks quickly once again. Similar results have been obtained
for 1-month-olds. The point of the shift is indicated by the arrow.
PHow We Learn a LanguageO 399
with the characteristic rhythms of speech in that language (Darwin,
1877; Endress, Nespor, & Mehler, 2009; J. L. Morgan, 1996).
By the age of 1 or 2 months, before they can even sit up unaided,
infants also become sensitive to distinctions between phonemes
(Eimas, Siqueland, Jusczyk, and Vigorito, 1971). At first, infants
respond to just about all sound distinctions made in any language,
and so Japanese babies can detect the distinction between la versus
ra as easily as American babies, despite the fact that this contrast is
not readily discerned by adult Japanese speakers. However, these perceptual
abilities erode if they are not exercised, and so infants lose
the ability to make distinctions that are not used in their language
community. Thus, Japanese infants gradually stop distinguishing
between la and ra. In the same way, American infants stop distinguishing between two
different k sounds that are perceptually distinct to Arabic speakers. By the age of 12
months, just as true speech begins, sensitivity to foreign contrasts has diminished significantly,
as the baby recalibrates to listen specifically for the particulars of the language
to which she is being exposed (Werker, 1995; Figure 10.24).
BUILDING THE MORPHEME AND WORD UNITS
FROM THE SEPARATE SOUNDS AND SYLLABLES
Infants must also find the boundaries between words. Often it is a challenge to do so,
as we see from errors that children sometimes make along the way. English-speaking
toddlers often reach their arms up to their mothers and fathers, plaintively crying out,
“Ca-ree-oo.” This is, apparently, an infant pronunciation of carry you, but we know
from other evidence that the children are not mixed up as to the words you and me, nor
do they have an urge to lift and transport their parent. Where, then, does this odd usage
come from? The children have repeatedly heard their caregivers ask them, “Do you want
me to carry you?” and they apparently perceived this utterance to end in a single threesyllable
word that is pronounced carreeoo—and means Carry me!
These kinds of errors often persist unnoticed for years. For instance, one 7-year-old,
carefully writing her first story about a teacher, spelled out Class be smissed!—showing
that she had falsely thought there was a word boundary within the word dismissed
(L Gleitman, H. Gleitman, & Shipley, 1972). These word-segmentation problems come
about because, as we noted earlier, spoken morphemes are not uttered with silent gaps
between them, unlike the case for writing, where gaps (white spaces) demarcate the
words. The right question, then, is not, How come learners make some mistakes in finding
word boundaries? but rather, How come they get these right most of the time? The
answer appears to be that infants mentally register which syllables occur right next to
each other with unusual frequency. For instance, the syllables rab and it often occur next
to each other; this is because together they form the frequent word rabbit. But stub followed
by it is much rarer, because there does not happen to be a word in English pronounced
stubbit. Beginning well before infants understand any meaningful words at all,
they are sensitive to these frequencies of co-occurrence. This process has been demonstrated
experimentally with artificial syllable sequences. Infants heard a 2-minute tape
recording in which syllables were spoken in a monotonous tone, with no pauses in
between the syllables. But there was a pattern. The experimenters had decided in advance
to designate the sequence “pabiku” as a word. Therefore, they arranged the sequences so
that if the infant heard “pabi,” then “ku” was sure to follow (just as, in ordinary circumstances,
hearing “rab” is a good predictor that one is about to hear “it”). For other syllables
and syllable pairs, there was no invariant sequencing. Astonishingly, the babies
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
0
6–8
months
8–10
months
10–12
months
11–12
months
Salish /k´ i/ vs. /q´ i/
Hindi /t.a/ vs. /ta/
10.24 Diminishing sensitivity to foreign
language contrasts as true speech
begins The graph shows English babies’
diminishing sensitivity in a dishabituation
paradigm to two foreign language contrasts
not made in English, as the babies
move from the pre-speech period (6–8
months) to the time when they begin to
speak English (11–12) months. One of these
contrasts is between two t-like sounds that
English treats as the same but the Indian
language Hindi treats as significantly different—
just as English treats t and d as
significantly different. The other contrast is
between two k-like sounds that English
treats as the same but which the American
Indian language Salish contrasts. When a
sound track shifts from one of these contrasts
(either /t.a/ vs.
/ta/ or /k´i/ vs.
/q´i/, the
6-month-olds notice (and dishabituate)
almost 100% of the time, but the
12-month-olds do not notice. The oneyear-
olds have become budding English
speakers who couldn’t care less about
contrasts between foreign t’s and k’s.
400 chapter 10 PLANGUAGEO
detected these patterns and their frequencies. In a subsequent test, they showed no evidence
of surprise if they heard the string “pabikupabikupabiku.” From the babies’ point
of view, this simply repeated a pattern they already knew. However, the babies did show
surprise if they were presented with the string “tudarotudarotudaro.” This was not a pattern
they had heard before, although they had heard each of its syllables many times.
Thus, the babies had learned the vocabulary of this made-up language. They had detected
the statistical pattern of which syllables followed which, despite their rather brief,
entirely passive exposure to these sounds and despite the absence of any supporting cues
such as pauses or meanings that go with the sounds (Aslin, Saffran, & Newport, 1998;
G. F. Marcus, Vijayan, Bandi Rao, & Vishton, 1999; Saffran, 2003; Xu & Garcia, 2008).
The Growth of Word Meaning
We have just seen something of how the child discovers the basic word-like units of language.
Children begin to understand a few of these words late in the first year of life, and
start to talk themselves shortly thereafter, uttering such simple words as duck and spoon
and bye-bye in appropriate contexts. How did they learn these meanings? The obvious
answer appears to be that, once they have noticed a recurrent sound pattern—for example,
the pattern r-a-b-i-t—they now look around the world to see which object or event is
characteristically in view when that pattern of sound is heard. Aha! Rabbit! (Locke, 1690;
Quine, 1960; Markman, 1994). But is such a procedure of matching up words to their
extralinguistic circumstances really as easy as that? There are many reasons to suppose
that the child’s path to word learning is strewn with problems (Figure 10.25). One major
problem is that the child’s environment is complex and cluttered, so
how can the baby decide what the caregiver’s utterance really refers to?
Even if the baby correctly identifies, say, a rabbit in view when the adult
is saying “rabbit,” what aspect of rabbit does the adult really have in
mind? After all, whenever one sees a rabbit, one sees its ear, one sees
something furry, and one necessarily sees an animal too. To which of
these ideas is the adult’s word really referring (Chomsky, 1959; L. R.
Gleitman, 1990; Quine, 1960)? By repeated observations of words in
different situations one would expect children to get much of this confusion
of words and things all sorted out (Locke, 1690; Smith & Yu,
2008; Xu & Tenenbaum, 2007). For instance, if the child is lucky, she
may one day hear her father say “rabbit” while she is viewing an earless
rabbit or a rabbit whose ears are hidden among the cabbages. This
might get the word rabbit sorted out from the word ear.But disentangling all these things,
parts, properties, actions, and so forth within the visible world certainly seems to pose a
formidable problem. Yet in actual fact children are impressively accurate in their discovery
of word meaning and the errors that do occur are short-lived. By the time the child has a
100-word vocabulary, he is almost always correct in using words to refer to things and
events in much the way that adults do. A number of factors intersect to solve this task.
SOCIAL ORIGINS OF WORD LEARNING
Understanding the young learner’s success in acquiring the word goes back to issues
of sociality, the infant’s focus on the adult’s attentional state and communicative
intent.We can see these effects in experiments where toddlers are taught new words
(Figure 10.26; Baldwin, 1991). The child is shown a fascinating new toy and allowed
to explore and play with it, whereupon the mother says excitedly, That’s a blicket! Wow,
10.25 Can you guess what new word this
child’s motherwas uttering? Maybe the
rich clutter of things in infants’ visible
world should make them as happy as kings,
but this same rich environment should
make trouble for their attempts to figure
out which of these objects an adult may be
speaking of at any one moment, and thus
to learn a new word meaning. Can you
guess which word the mother was saying to
the child as this photo was snapped? (See
the caption accompanying Figure 10.27 for
the right answer.) What clues did you use?
Courtesy Tamara Nicol Medina
Look! A Dax!
(A) If the parent is looking at the toy when
saying a new name, the child will assign
the name “dax” to the toy.
(B) If the parent is looking at something else
when saying a new name, the child will
not assign the name “dax” to the toy.
PHow We Learn a LanguageO 401
a blicket! Will the child by a process of automatic association now think
that the name for this new toy is blicket? In fact, rather than jumping
to this conclusion right away, most children appear to seek evidence
that the mother was attending to the toy too. Upon
hearing the mother’s voice, they immediately glance into
her eyes (just as an adult would) to see if the mother
herself was looking at the toy in the child’s hands
(and thus, probably, referring to it and not to
something else when she said blicket). If the
mother was indeed looking at this toy, then,
when tested later on, the children showed that
they had learned the blicket label for the new
toy. But if the mother had been looking
elsewhere—say, into a bucket whose contents
were not visible to the child—the children did
not assign this new word as the toy’s name.
Rather they thought it was the name for something,
so far unseen, inside the bucket. In
short, even children under 2 years of age use
social context, in this case the caregiver’s
attentional stance toward an event, as a critical guide in language learning (Figure
10.27). They do not form word-to-meaning associations if the social context of language
use does not guide them to do so (Baldwin, 1991; see also P. Bloom, 2002;
Frank, Goodman, & Tenenbaum, 2009; Medina, Trueswell, Snedeker, & Gleitman,
2008; Nappa,Wessel, McEldoon, Gleitman, & Trueswell, 2009).
WHOLE OBJECTS AT THE BASIC LEVEL
Word learning is heavily influenced by the ways children think about and categorize
objects and events in the world (Gordon, 2004; Rosch, 1978). This is reflected, for
example, in the fact that young children acquire the basic-level words for whole
10.26 Infants are mind readers! The
mother says “Look! a dax!” but in (A) and
(B) she is looking at two different things
when she says this new word. When subsequently
tested (asked to “find a dax”),
the baby guesses that the mother meant
“dax” to refer to the toy she (the baby) is
holding only under condition (A). Under
condition (B), the baby guesses that
“dax” is the name for whatever the
mother later pulls out of the bucket.
10.27 If “the shoe” fits: Three contexts for learning the word shoe (A) The baby often can
pick out the adult’s intent by noticing where the adult and/or the learner himself is looking (see
again Figures 10.25 and 10.26), even though there are many objects plainly in view. (B) Sometimes
a lucky child will see several simplified pictures when hearing the word “shoe” (L. B. Smith & Yu,
2008). In this case the child is saved from (falsely) supposing that “shoe” means sandal, sneaker,
or high heel just because the single general term applies to all three instances (Xu & Tenenbaum,
2007). (C) A particularly useful context for learning is when adult and child are socializing
together on a matter relating to shoes (Medina, Trueswell, Snedeker, & Gleitman, 2008).
(A) (B) (C)
basic-level word A concept at some
accessible, middling degree of abstractness
or inclusiveness (e.g., dog, spoon).
Courtesy Tamara Nicol Medina
402 chapter 10 PLANGUAGEO
objects (dog) before learning their parts (ear), superordinates (animal), or subordinates
(Chihuahua). One might think this happens just because the basic-level words
are used most frequently to children. But differential frequency does not seem to be
the whole explanation. In some homes, the word Spot or Rex (specific names) is used
much more often than dog (a basic-level term) for obvious reasons. And it is true that
in this case the young learner will often come to use the word Spot before he learns to
utter dog. But he first learns it as a basic-level term all the same. This is shown by the
fact that he will utter Spot to refer to the neighbor’s dog as well as his own. Similarly—
and sometimes embarrassingly—the father is by far the most frequent man that many
a toddler has seen and so she may point and say Daddy! in response to any man
she sees in the street or the supermarket. Such overgeneralizations convert the
interpretation from a specific name to the basic level of categorization, evidently, the
most natural level for carving up experience (Mervis & Crisafi, 1978; Shipley, Kuhn,&
Madden, 1983).
Children also have other biases in how they think about and use new words. In
some studies, for example, experimenters have taught children nonsense words—
pointing to some novel object and saying, “That is a biff.” To what new objects will
the child apply this new label? She generally will not use biff to describe other objects
that happen to be made of the same material, size, or color. Instead, she uses biff to
describe objects having the same shape as the entire original (Landau, Smith, &
Jones, 1988; Soja, Carey, & Spelke, 1991). Apparently, then, learners naturally understand
this new term as a label for the entire object (Markman & Hutchinson, 1984).
And indeed investigation of infants’ early vocabularies show that they learn many
words for whole objects (such as table) before they acquire words for these objects’
sizes (big), parts (leg), or material composition (wood) even though bigness, woodenness
and table-leg are in principle just as visible as the whole table when the word
table is uttered.
PERCEPTUAL AND CONCEPTUAL PROPERTIES
OF CHILD LANGUAGE
The very first examples of language use (at roughly the age of 10 months) seem to
involve direct labeling of objects that the child is looking at, without the inclination or
ability to talk about absent things and events. But even at the tender age of 12 to 16
months, infants begin to search for an absent object whose name is mentioned
(Huttenlocher, 1974). The ability to use words in the absence of their referents is firmly
in place at about 18 months (Tomasello, Strosberg, & Akhtar, 1996). One demonstration
is from investigators who followed 24-month-old children’s gaze when they heard
questions such as, “Where’s the doggie?” In one condition of the experiment, the child
was actually looking at a picture of a dog on a screen when she heard the question. In
the second condition, the child was looking at another picture (say, of a car) to her
right, but (because there were opportunities to look from side to side in advance) the
child knew that the dog picture could be viewed if she shifted her eyes leftward. In the
third condition, there was no dog picture—rather, a picture of a car to the right and,
say, one of a shoe to the left. If the child was already looking at the picture of a dog (the
first condition), naturally enough, her eyes did not shift in response to this question. In
the second condition, she rapidly shifted her gaze toward the dog picture. But the big
question is what the child would do in the total absence of dogs or dog pictures. If she
really can think about absent objects, she ought to go right on searching to make sense
of the utterance “Where is the doggie?” when a dog is not anywhere in sight. And this
superordinates Concepts that are more
abstract or inclusive than basic-level concepts
(e.g., animal, utensil ).
subordinates Concepts that are less
abstract ormore particular than basiclevel
concepts (e.g., poodle, soup spoon).
PHow We Learn a LanguageO 403
is precisely what happened. Apparently even the smallest toddlers can understand
language “decontextualized”—that is, divorced from the immediate evidence of the
senses (Swingley & Fernald, 2002).
USING KNOWN WORDS AND SENTENCES
TO LEARN MORE WORDS
By the second year of life children acquire a remarkably complex new trick: They come
to use the structure of the language they are learning as further information guiding
their word learning (R. Brown, 1957; Fisher & Gleitman, 2002; L. R. Gleitman, 1990;
D. G. Hall et al., 2000; Landau & Gleitman, 1985; Landau & Stecker, 1990; Lidz,
Gleitman, & Gleitman, 2003; Fernandes, Marcus, DiNubila, & Vouloumanos, 2006;
Papafragou, Cassidy, & Gleitman, 2007). In one study, 3- and 4-year-olds were shown
a picture in which a pair of hands was performing a kneading sort of motion with a
mass of red confetti-like material that was overflowing a low, striped container (Figure
10.28; R. Brown, 1957). Some of the children were asked, “In this picture, can you
show me sebbing?” The children responded by making the same kneading motions
with their hands. Other children were asked, “In this picture, can you show me a seb?”
In response, the children pointed to the container. Still other children were asked,
“Can you show me some seb?” These children pointed to the confetti. The evidence of
grammatical word class (for example, seb ! ing indicates that seb is a verb) for word
meaning (verbs usually describe actions) influenced their understanding of what the
new word referred to in the picture.
It seems, then, that children’s learning proceeds in two directions at once. On the
one hand, they use their growing knowledge of word classes within the language to
guide their discovery of what a particular new word means. It is almost as if the child
were saying to himself, “Because this new word was just used as a noun, it probably
describes a thing.” And similarly, they use their knowledge of individual words to predict
how those words can be used: “Because this Woodstock toy is now an instrument
for hitting me on the head, I can use it as a verb and tell my friend to ‘Stop
Woodstocking me or go home!’” (E. V. Clark, Gelman, & Lane, 1985; Pinker, 1984).
Using both kinds of evidence, children efficiently find their way into knowledge of
tens of thousands of words and the ways these words can be used in sentences
(Bowerman, 1982; L. R. Gleitman, Cassidy, Papafragou, Nappa, & Trueswell, 2005;
Golinkoff, Hirsh-Pasek, Cauley, & Gordon, 1987; Lidz, Gleitman, & Gleitman, 2003;
Naigles, 1990; Snedeker & Gleitman, 2004).
The Progression to Adult Language
Typically, children’s speech progresses very rapidly by the beginning of the third year of
life. Utterances now become longer and the children can say short sentences. Function
words begin to appear. By 5 years the average child sounds much like an adult in the forms
of her speech. How do children reach this level of sophistication? It is certainly not by
memorizing all the sentences that are said to them. For one thing, we know that people,
even little children, can understand sentences that are quite novel and even bizarre, such
as There is a unicorn hiding behind your left ear, the very first time they hear them. More generally,
a good estimate of the number of English sentences less than 20 words in length is
230 (a bit more than a billion). A child memorizing a new sentence every 5 seconds, starting
at birth, working at this 24 hours a day, would have mastered only 3% of this set by his
fifth birthday, making the learning-by-memorizing strategy hopelessly implausible. But
10.28 Grammatical word classes give
clues to word meaning When asked In
this picture, can you show me a seb? (count
noun), children pointed to the bowl, but
when asked In this picture, can you show me
sebbing? (verb), they pointed to the hands
and made kneading or scooping motions
with their own hands. And when asked In
this picture, can you show me some seb?
(mass noun), they pointed to the confettilike
contents of the bowl.
404 chapter 10 PLANGUAGEO
what is the alternative? We can get some hints by looking at the relatively simple case of
word building. As so often, “errors” that the youngsters make along the way reveal something
of the procedures involved in acquiring the adult system.
An example is the learning of the past tense. When children start using past tense
verbs, often they say them correctly at first. They use the suffix -ed as an adult would,
applying it to regular verbs, but not to irregular ones. Thus, the child says “walked”
and “talked” and also (correctly) uses irregular forms such as ran, came, and ate. By
the age of 4 or 5, however, the same children sometimes say “runned,” “bringed,” and
“holded” (G. F. Marcus et al., 1992; Prasada & Pinker, 1993a) as in the following
conversation:
CHILD: My teacher holded the baby rabbits and we patted them.
MOTHER: Did you say your teacher held the baby rabbits?
CHILD: Yes.
MOTHER: What did you say she did?
CHILD: She holded the baby rabbits and we patted them.
MOTHER: Did you say she held them tightly?
CHILD: No,she holded them loosely.(Bellugi,1971)
This kind of error offers evidence that children do not learn language solely, or even
mostly, by imitation. Few adults would say “holded” or “eated,” and the mother in the
quoted exchange repeatedly offers the correct form of the verb for imitation. In fact,
parents are often aghast at these errors. A half-year earlier, their child was speaking correctly
but now is making errors. Apparently, he is regressing! So parents often try to
correct these errors, but to no avail: The child stands firm, despite the correction.
But if not the result of imitation, then what is it that leads children to produce
“errors” even though there was conformity to the adult model’s speech at an earlier
developmental moment? Many investigators argue that the young child starts out by
memorizing the past tense of each new verb, learning that the past tense of want is
wanted, the past tense of climb is climbed, and so on. But this is a highly inefficient
strategy. It is far more efficient to detect the pattern: Simply add the -ed suffix to a verb
every time you are speaking of the past. But once the child detects this pattern, it is
apparently quite easy to get carried away—to believe that what is very often true must
be true in every single case—and so overregularization errors are produced. These
errors will drop out later, when the child takes the further step of realizing that, while
there is a pattern, there are also exceptions.
LANGUAGE LEARNING
IN CHANGED ENVIRONMENTS
Under normal conditions, language seems to emerge in much the same way in
virtually all children all over the world. They progress from babbling to one-word
speech, advance to two-word sentences, and eventually graduate to complex
sentence forms and meanings. But is this pattern truly universal? What happens
when children grow up in environments radically different from those in which
language growth usually proceeds? Examining these cases helps us to understand
the biological roots of human language and which aspects of the early environment
are essential.
PLanguage Learning in Changed EnvironmentsO 405
Wild Children
In 1920, Indian villagers discovered a wolf mother in her den together with four cubs.
Two were baby wolves, but the other two were human children, subsequently named
Kamala and Amala. No one knows how they got there or why the wolf adopted them.
Roger Brown (1958) tells us what these children were like:
Kamala was about eight years old and Amala was only one and one-half. They were
thoroughly wolfish in appearance and behavior: Hard callus had developed on their
knees and palms from going on all fours. Their teeth were sharp edged. They moved
their nostrils sniffing food. Eating and drinking were accomplished by lowering their
mouths to the plate. They ate raw meat. . . . At night they prowled and sometimes
howled. They shunned other children but followed the dog and cat. They slept rolled
up together on the floor. . . . Amala died within a year but Kamala lived to be eighteen.
. . . In time, Kamala learned to walk erect, to wear clothing, and even to speak a few
words. (p. 100)
The outcome was much the same for the 30 or so other wild children about whom
we have reports (Figure 10.29). When found, they were all shockingly animal-like.
None of them could be rehabilitated to use language normally, though some, including
Kamala, learned to speak a few words.
Isolated Children
The data from these wild children are difficult to interpret, in part because we do not
know why or how the children were abandoned. Clearer data come from the (unfortunately
many) cases of children raised by humans but under conditions that were
hideously inhumane, for their parents were either vicious or deranged. Sometimes such
parents will deprive a baby of all human contact. For example, “Isabelle” (a code name
used to protect the child’s privacy) was hidden away, apparently from early infancy, and
given only the minimal attention necessary to sustain her life. No one spoke to her (the
mother was deaf and also emotionally indifferent).
At the age of 6, Isabelle was discovered by other adults and brought into a normal
environment. Of course, she had no language, and her cognitive development was
below that of a normal 2-year-old. But within a year she learned to speak, her tested
intelligence was normal, and she took her place in an ordinary school (R. Brown, 1958;
K. Davis, 1947). Thus, Isabelle at 7 years, with 1 year of language practice, spoke about
as well as her peers in the second grade, all of whom had had 7 years of practice.
But rehabilitation from isolation is not always so successful. “Genie,” discovered in
California about 40 years ago, was 14 years old when she was found. Since about the
age of 20 months she had lived tied to a chair; she was frequently beaten and never spoken
to but sometimes was barked at, because her father said she was no more than a
dog. Once discovered, Genie was brought into foster care and taught by psychologists
and linguists (Fromkin, Krashen, Curtiss, Rigler, & Rigler, 1974). But Genie did not
become a normal language user. She says many words and puts them together into
meaningful propositions as young children do, such as “No more take wax” and
“Another house have dog.” Thus, she has learned certain basics of language. Indeed, her
semantic sophistication—what she means by what she says—is far beyond that of
young children. Yet even after years of instruction, Genie has not learned the function
words that appear in mature English sentences, nor does she combine propositions
together in elaborate sentences (Curtiss, 1977).
10.29 A modern wild boy Ramu, a young
boy discovered in India in 1976, appears to
have been reared by wolves. He was
deformed, apparently from lying in
cramped positions, as in a den. He could
not walk, and drank by lapping with his
tongue. His favorite food was raw meat,
which he seemed to be able to smell at a
distance. After he was found, he lived at
the home for destitute children run by
Mother Theresa in Lucknow, Utter Pradesh.
He learned to bathe and dress himself but
never learned to speak. He continued to
prefer raw meat and would often sneak out
to prey upon fowl in the neighbor’s chicken
coop. Ramu died at the age of about 10 in
February 1985.
406 chapter 10 PLANGUAGEO
Why did Genie not progress to full language learning? The best guess is that the crucial
factor is the age at which language learning began. Genie was discovered after she
had reached puberty, while Isabelle was only six years old when her rehabilitation
began. As we shall see later, there is some reason to believe that there is a sensitive
developmental period for language learning during which it is most easily acquired.
Language without Sound
Deaf people obviously cannot perceive the spoken word. Yet they do learn a language,
one that involves a complex system of gestures. In the United States, the deaf usually
learn American Sign Language (ASL), but many other sign languages also exist.
Plainly, then, language can exist in the absence of sound. Are these gestural systems
genuine languages? One indication that they are is that these systems are not derived
by translation from the spoken languages around them but are independently created
within and by communities of deaf individuals (Klima et al., 1979; Senghas, 1995).
Further evidence comes from comparing the structure and development of ASL to that
of spoken languages. ASL has hand shapes and positions of which each word is composed,
much like the tongue and lip shapes that allow us to fashion the phonemes of
spoken language (Stokoe, 1960). It has morphemes and grammatical principles for
combining words into sentences that are similar to those of spoken language (Supalla
& Newport, 1978). Finally, babies born to deaf users of ASL (whether or not the babies
themselves are deaf) pick up the system from these caregivers through informal interaction
rather than by explicit instruction, just as we learn our spoken language
(Newport & Ashbrook, 1977). And they go through the same steps on the way to adult
knowledge as do hearing children learning English. Thus, language does not depend
on the auditory-vocal channel. When the auditory modes of communication are
denied to humans of normal mentality, they come up with an alternative that reproduces
the same contents and structures as other language systems. It appears that language
is an irrepressible human trait: Deny it to the mouth, and it will dart out
through the fingers.
Language without a Model
What if children of normal mentality were raised in a loving and supportive environment
but not exposed to either speech or signed language? Researchers found six
children who were in exactly this sort of situation (Feldman, Goldin-Meadow, &
Gleitman, 1978; Goldin-Meadow, 2000; Goldin-Meadow & Feldman, 1977). These
children were deaf, so they were unable to learn spoken language. Their parents were
hearing and did not know ASL. They had decided not to allow their children to learn a
gestural language, because they shared the belief (held by some educators) that deaf
children should focus their efforts on learning spoken language through special training
in lip-reading and vocalization. This training often proceeds slowly and has limited
success, so for some time these children did not have any usable access to spoken
English. Not yet able to read lips, unable to hear, and without exposure to a gestural
language, these children were essentially without any linguistic stimulation.
These language-isolated children soon did something remarkable: They invented a
language of their own. For a start, the children invented a sizable number of gestures
that were easily understood by others. For example, they would flutter their fingers in
a downward motion to express snow, twist their fingers to express a twist-top bottle,
American Sign Language (ASL) The
manual-visual language used by most of
deaf persons in the United States.
PLanguage Learning in Changed EnvironmentsO 407
and so on (Figure 10.30;Goldin-Meadow, 2003). This spontaneously developing
communication system showed many parallels to ordinary language
learning. The children began to gesture one sign at a time at approximately
the same age that hearing children begin to speak one word at a time, and
they progressed to more complex sentences in the next year or so. In these
basic sentences, the deaf children placed the individual gestures in a fixed
serial order, according to semantic role—again, just as hearing children do.
More recent evidence has shown just how far deaf children can go in
inventing a language if they are placed into a social environment that favors
their communicating with each other. In Nicaragua until the early 1980s,
deaf children from rural areas were widely scattered and usually knew no others who
were deaf. Based on the findings just mentioned, it was not surprising to discover that
all these deaf individuals developed homemade gestural systems (“home signs”) to
communicate with the hearing people around them, each system varying from the
others in an idiosyncratic way. But then a school was created just for such deaf children
in Nicaragua, and since then they have been bused daily from all over the countryside
to attend it. Just as in the American and many European cases, the school
authorities have tried to teach these children to lip-read and vocalize. But on the bus
and in the lunchroom, and literally behind the teachers’ backs, these children (age 4
to 14 in the initial group) began to gesture to each other. Bit by bit their idiosyncratic
home signs converged on conventions that they all used, and the system grew more
and more elaborate (Figure 10.31; Senghas, Román, & Mavillapalli, 2006). The
emerging gestural language of this school has now been observed over three generations
of youngsters, as new 4-year-olds arrive at the school every year. These new
members not only learn the system but also elaborate and improve on it, with the
effect that in the space of 30 years a language system of considerable complexity and
semantic sophistication has been invented and put to communicative use by these
children (Kegl, Senghas, & Coppola, 1999; Senghas, Kita, and Özyürek, 2004).
Perhaps it is true that Rome was not built in a day, but for all we know, maybe Latin
was! In sum, if children are denied access to a human language, they go to the trouble
to invent one for themselves.
Children Deprived of Access to Some of the Meanings
The extraordinarily robust nature of language development is also apparent when we
consider language learning in the absence of vision. Imagine a child who hears, Look!
There’s a big dog! or Do you see that man playing the guitar? Surely, the child will find it
easier to grasp the meaning of these phrases if she can observe the dog or the guitar
player, using the perceptual experience to help decode the linguistic input. This would
seem to suggest that language learning would proceed slowly or be distorted in a blind
child cut off from many of the learning opportunities available to the sighted child.
Remarkably, though, the evidence shows that blind children learn language as rapidly
and as well as sighted children. One particularly striking example is vision-related
words like look and see, which blind children use as early (2 years old) and as systematically
as sighted children. Of course, there are differences in how blind and sighted children
understand these words. A young sighted listener asked to look up! will tilt her face
upward (even if her vision is blocked by a blindfold). For this child, look clearly refers to
vision (Figure 10.32A). A congenitally blind child, when given the same command produces
a different—but entirely sensible—response. Keeping her head immobile, she
10.30 Self-made signs of a deaf boy
never exposed to sign language A twosign
sequence. (A) The first sign means
“eat” or “food.” Immediately before, the
boy had pointed to a grape. (B) The second
sign means “give.” The total sequence
means “give me the food.”
(A) (B)
10.31 A new language is invented Deaf
children in Nicaragua have invented a sign
language, with younger children newly
arriving at their school improving and
elaborating on it with every passing year.
408 chapter 10 PLANGUAGEO
reaches upward and searches the space above her body with her
hands (Figure 10.32B; Landau & Gleitman, 1985). Thus, each of these
children understands look to be an instruction to search a bit of the
world by use of the sense organs.
Not only do these input-deprived youngsters come to understand
terms that refer to sight for those of us with normal vision, but they
also know much about the application of color terms. Perhaps it is
not so surprising that a blind 5-year-old can respond to the query
Can a cow be green? by saying I think they are usually brown or white for
he might on some occasion have heard the phrase a brown cow
uttered by sighted adults, and never a green cow. But to the query Can
an idea be green? the blind child does not wildly guess at some color,
but can sensibly answer No, that’s silly; ideas are not any color; they are
only in your head. All this knowledge without any personal experience
of colors at all!
Once again, we see that language and even apparently sightdependent
concepts emerge in considerable complexity and on schedule despite a dramatic
shift away from the standard circumstances of learning. This provides further
support for the claim that language is a truly basic factor in human nature. Prepared as
the human child is to acquire a language, its learning can proceed despite significant
sensory deprivation.
Children Exposed to More Than One Language:
The Case of Bilingualism
So far we have looked at learning in less than ideal environments, particularly where the
input to the learners is diminished because of isolation or disability. What happens in
a case that seems to be the opposite: when infants are exposed from earliest infancy to
more than one language at a time, in the bilingual home? Notice that (unless bilingually
reared babies sleep less!) they will hear each of the two languages only for half as much
time as a monolingually reared baby hears the single language of the home. Yet remarkably
enough, the budding bilinguals learn both languages as fast and as well as the
monolinguals learn one language. A 3-year-old who hears, say, Italian and Slovenian
spoken about equally often at home will speak and understand both these languages
like a 3-year-old rather than being like an 18-month-old for each of them (Kovelman,
Shalinsky, Berens, & Petitto, 2008). From one perspective, this is just what we would
predict because these babies are in “the sensitive period” during which, as we have seen,
they soak up language information like little cognitive sponges. But from another perspective,
the outcome is surprising because babies and young preschoolers are known
to be especially prone to confusion—to suffer interference—when trying to learn or
perform two different tasks. Why don’t they fail to differentiate the two languages they
are hearing, or at least mix up the words and rules from the two of them with detrimental
effects on language learning?
The answer seems to be that bilingual exposure in early infancy (termed crib bilingualism)
enhances the ability to monitor and switch between competing tasks in a way
that not only supports learning the two languages, but extends to flexible switching
among other tasks as well. One group of investigators demonstrated this by testing
monolingual and bilingual young children in the Dimensional Change Card Sorting
Task (DCCS; Zelazo, 2006). The set of cards for this task differ both by color (say, red
cards and green cards) and by shape (say, square cards and oval cards). The child exper-
10.32 The meaning of look (A) A blindfolded,
sighted 3-year-old tilts her head
upward in response to “Look up!” for to
her the word look means “perceive by eye.”
(B) A congenitally blind 3-year-old raises
her arms upward in response to “Look up!”
for to her the word look means “perceive by
hand.”
Look up!
(A) (B)
crib bilingual A prelinguistic infant who is
exposed to two ormore languages in the
home environment.
PLanguage Learning in Changed EnvironmentsO 409
imental participant is first asked to sort the full deck of cards on one dimension, for
example, color, and later asked to re-sort them, this time by shape. Children under 4
years of age, though they easily perform either of these sorts with no difficulty, tend to
slow down and to err when trying to switch in the re-sorting phase of the experiment,
when they have to drop the previously valid criterion of color and sort in terms of
shape, or the reverse. In the present context, it is of great interest that young children
who were crib bilinguals, while no better than the monolinguals in the sorting phase of
the experiment, are reliably better in the re-sorting phase. Apparently the bilingual
experience—in which one must constantly inhibit everything one knows about language
B when one is hearing or speaking language A—has had a general effect on developing
cognition. The bilingual achieves cognitive flexibility and “executive control” at an
earlier than expected age (Bialystok, 1999; see also Diamond, Kirkham, & Anso, 2002).
Indeed these positive effects of bilingual environments are observable even in 7-montholds
who can efficiently acquire and process incompatible linguistic patterns that their
monolingual peers cannot (Kovács & Mehler, 2009; see Figure 10.33).
Early bilingualism also shows its positive linguistic-cognitive effects when we consider
how young children comprehend sentences. Here again, we see failures of monitoring
and flexible switching by children as old as 8 or 9 years. For instance, when a
young child hears an ambiguous sentence of the kind we discussed earlier (see Figure
10.18), she is likely to skip confidently down one garden path, in most cases never to
return. This is in contrast to the adult who rapidly notices and repairs wrong or questionable
initial interpretations (Trueswell, Sekerina, Hill, & Logrip, 1999). For this very
reason, children under 6 or 7 years of age do not “get” puns and verbal tricks like Will
you join me in a bowl of soup, for they cannot switch from one to the other structural
interpretation (Hirsh-Pasek, Gleitman, & Gleitman, 1978). The bilingual child again
has the advantage over his monolingual age-mates, a kind of cognitive control that
10.33 SCIENTIFIC METHOD: Will a baby raised in a bilingual home (“crib bilingual”) be more open
to new patterns of language-like stimulation?
Method
1. The infant sits on mother’s lap and hears different instances of the syllable
pattern ABB (mo-la-la, bi-du-du, etc.).
2. Two seconds after any such ABB pattern is heard, a cute clown appears in Box 1,
to the infant’s left.
3. After 9 such trials, the syllable pattern AAB begins instead
(e.g., mo-mo-la, bi-bi-du).
4. Two seconds after any such AAB pattern is heard, a clown appears in Box 2,
to the infant’s right. This latter pattern of sound and its visual reward continues
for 9 more trials.
Results: Both 7-month-old monolinguals and crib bilinguals learn the initial ABB pattern as shown by the fact that they begin to
turn their eyes quickly to Box 1 when they hear an instance of ABB, before the clown appears. But when the syllable pattern changes
to AAB, only the crib bilinguals switch to anticipating that the visual reward will now appear to their right.
CONCLUSION: Hearing two languages in the home has evidently readied the crib bilinguals for new kinds of stimulation.
SOURCE STUDY: Kovács & Mehler, 2009
410 chapter 10 PLANGUAGEO
enables them to monitor, repair, and reinterpret sentences on the fly from an early age
(Novick, Thompson-Schill, & Trueswell, 2008; Slobin, 1978).
We see then that the facts about early bilingualism are educational arguments for
early bilingualism. There is every reason to suppose that exposing very young children
to more than one language would be beneficial to cognitive growth and development.
This is even leaving aside the social and economic benefits that accrue to competent
multilinguals in the rapidly globalizing societies of the 21st century.
LANGUAGE LEARNING
WITH CHANGED ENDOWMENTS
As we just saw, language learning can proceed in the face of severe environmental deprivations
so long as the learner has a normal human brain. But what happens if the
nature of the learners themselves is changed? Since language learning and use are
determined by brain function, changes in the brain should have strong effects (Fowler,
Gelman, & Gleitman, 1994; Lenneberg, 1967; G. F.Marcus, 2004;Newport, 1990).
There are many indications that the nature and state of the brain do have massive
consequences for language functioning. In Chapter 3 we discussed the evidence of
aphasia, in which damage in the brain’s left hemisphere can have devastating and
highly specific impacts on speech and comprehension. Further evidence comes from
individuals with an apparently inherited syndrome known as Specific Language
Impairment (SLI). Individuals with this syndrome are generally slow to learn language
and throughout their lives have difficulty in understanding and producing
many sentences. Yet these individuals perform normally on most other measures,
including measurements of intelligence (Gopnik & Crago, 1990; Pinker, 1994; van
Der Lely & Christian, 2000).
We can also find cases with the reverse pattern: preservation of language along with
disruption of other mental capacities. Individuals with this pattern (called Williams
syndrome) have mild to moderate retardation (with average IQ scores of 65) and severe
disruption of spatial capacites, but they are still capable of quite fluent and articulate
language (Figure 10.34; Bellugi, Marks, Bihrle, & Sabo, 1991; Landau & Zukowski,
2002; Musolino, Chunyo, & Landau, in press; Pinker, 1995).
Overall, we see from these unusual cases of brain organization (or injury) that
language and general intelligence are partly distinct. Some of these conditions target
language particularly, leaving much of the rest of cognition largely intact. Under
other conditions, language knowledge and use function very well indeed, but in the
presence of diminished cognitive capacities.
The Sensitive Period Hypothesis
The human brain continues to grow and develop in the years after birth, reaching its
mature state more or less at the age of puberty, with some further brain development—
especially in the prefrontal cortex—continuing well into adolescence. If language is
indeed rooted in brain function, then we might expect language learning to be influenced
by these maturational changes. Is it? According to the sensitive period hypothesis, the
brain of the young child is particularly well suited to the task of language learning. As the
brain matures, learning (both of a first language and of later languages) becomes more
difficult (Lenneberg, 1967; Newport, 1990).
Sensitive periods for the uptake and consolidation of new information seem to
govern some aspects of learning in many species. One example is the attachment of the
aphasia Any of a number of linguistic
disorders caused by injury to ormalformation
of the brain.
Specific Language Impairment (SLI)
A syndrome of unknown etiology in
which the course of development of a
first language is unusually protracted
despite otherwise normally developing
cognitive functions.
sensitive period An early period during
the development of an organism when it
is particularly responsive to environmental
stimulation. Outside of this period,
the same environmental events have less
impact.
PLanguage Learning with Changed EndowmentsO 411
(A) The model figures the children were asked to copy
(B) Attempts from 11-year-old child with
Williams syndrome
(C) Attempts from a normally developing 6-year-old (D) Complex-sentence picture match that both normally developing
and Williams syndrome children understand
The cat who meows will not be given a fish or milk.
Meow!
10.34 Children with Williams syndrome show severe spatial deficits but understand
complex sentences and theirmeanings (A) Geometrical figures that children were asked
to copy. (B) A sample copy from an 11-year-old child with Williams syndrome, in which this
child shows severe spatial impairment. (C) A sample copy from a normally developing
6-year-old child. (D) illustrates that people with WS can understand sentences that are
grammatically complex. For example, if they see the picture shown in (D), they know that
one can truthfully say “The cat who meows will not be given a fish or milk.” The stark
contrast between their failures in spatial organization and their success in language tasks
shows that these two capacities are independent.
10.35 Sensitive period in the development of bird song (A) A graphic presentation of
the song of an adult, male white-crowned sparrow. The figure, a sound spectrogram, shows
that the normal song begins with a whistle or two, continues with a series of trills, and ends
with a vibrato. (B) The song of a bird exposed to normal song only between the ages of 35
and 56 days. His adult song was almost normal. (C) The song of an isolated bird exposed to
normal song between days 50 and 71. The adult song of this bird has some crude similarities
to normal white-crowned sparrow song. (D) and (E) show the songs of birds whose exposure
to normal song occurred very early in life (days 3 to 7) or very late (after 300 days of
age), respectively. Training at either of these times had no effect (after Marler, 1970).
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
(E)
young of various animals to their mothers, which generally can be formed only in early
childhood (see Chapter 11). Another example is bird song. Male birds of many species
have a song that is characteristic of their own kind. They learn this song by listening to
adult males of their species. But this exposure will be effective primarily when it occurs
at a certain period in the bird’s life. To take a concrete case, baby white-crowned sparrows
will learn their species song in all its glory, complete with trills and grace notes,
only if they hear this music (sung, of course, by an adult white-crowned sparrow) sometime
between the 7th and 60th day of their life. If they do not hear the song during this
period, but instead hear it sometime during the next month, they acquire only the rudiments
of the song, without the full elaborations heard in normal adults (Figure 10.35).
412 chapter 10 PLANGUAGEO
If the exposure comes still later, it has almost no effect. The bird will never sing normally
(Marler, 1970).
Do human languages work in the same way? Are adults less able to learn language
because they have passed beyond some sensitive learning period? Much of the evidence
has traditionally come from studies of second-language learning.
SECOND-LANGUAGE LEARNING
In the initial stages of learning a second language, adults appear to be much more efficient
than children (Snow & Hoefnagel-Hohle, 1978). The adult will venture halting
but comprehensible sentences soon after arrival in the new language community while
the 2-year-old may at first lapse into silence. But in the long run the outcome is just the
reverse. After a few years, very small children speak the new language fluently and soon
sound just like natives. This is much less common in adults. This point has been documented
in many studies. In one investigation, the participants in the experiments were
native Chinese and Korean speakers who came to the United States (and became
immersed in the English-language community) at varying ages. These individuals were
tested only after they had been in the United States for at least 5 years, so they had had
ample exposure to English. And all of them were students and faculty members at a
large midwestern university, so they shared some social background (and presumably
were motivated to learn the new language so as to succeed in their university roles).
In the test procedure, half of the sentences the participants heard were grossly
ungrammatical (e.g., The farmer bought two pig at the market; The little boy is speak to a
policeman). The other half were the grammatical counterparts of these same sentences.
The participants’ task was to indicate which sentences were grammatical in English
and which were not. The results are shown in Figure 10.36. Those who had been
exposed to English before age seven performed just like native speakers of English.
Thereafter there was an increasing decrement in performance as a function of age at
first exposure. The older the subjects when they first came to the United States, the less
well they acquired English (J. Johnson & Newport, 1989).
Recent experimentation confirms that very young children acquire second languages
at native levels, and adds important detail about this process. Snedeker, Geren, and
Shafto (2007) followed the language learning progress of Chinese children adopted (at
ages 2 to 6 years) by Americans. After adoption, these children were immersed in
monolingual English-language environments. Their English-language learning was
compared with that of American-born infants.Would the older Chinese-born children
learn differently (because they were more cognitively mature)? Or would they learn in
the same way as the infants (because all of them were learning English from scratch)?
The results show both effects: Just like infant first-language learners, the adoptees
learned nouns before verbs, and content words before function words, suggesting that
such words are easiest to learn regardless of cognitive status of the learner. But the
adoptees acquired vocabulary at a faster rate, and so caught up to native-born agemates
after 18 months or so of being in the new language community
Finally, we can ask how the native and later-learned languages are distributed in the
brain. It could be, for example, that the usual brain locus for language gets set up precisely
in the course of acquiring a first language and thereafter loses plasticity; as a
result, the later-learned language must be shunted into new areas that are not specialized
for, or are secondary for, language. This would be another way of explaining why
knowledge of the first language is generally so much better than knowledge of the second
or third or fourth language learned. There is in fact accumulating evidence that the
brain loci of late-learned languages usually are different from those of the first-learned
10.36 Ask your parents buy your tickets
to Paris soon! The earlier in life one
moves into a new linguistic community, the
more “native-like” one’s attainment of the
new language will probably become.
Results shown are scores (out of 276 items)
on a test of grammaticality judgments by
46 Korean and Chinese individuals who
came to the United States at different
ages.
230
210
250
270
290
Native 3–7 8–10 11–15 17–39
Mean number correct
Age of arrival
PLanguage Learning with Changed EndowmentsO 413
language, a finding consistent with this suggestion. However, there are other possible
interpretations of the same finding. Possibly the real cause of different loci for the two
languages is the individual’s differential proficiency rather than the fact that one was
learned before the other. One group of investigators supported this view by studying
rare examples of people who learn a language in adulthood and become whizzes at it.
Not surprisingly, many of these high-proficiency subjects were college instructors in
modern language departments. The finding was that brain activity for both their languages
occurred in the same brain sites (Perani et al., 1998).
LATE EXPOSURE TO A FIRST LANGUAGE
These second-language learning results lend some credence to the sensitive period
hypothesis which, as earlier noted, is also consistent with the differential language
recovery of isolated children (the cases of “Isabel” and “Genie”). However, there is an
alternative explanation. Possibly, second languages are rarely as well learned as first
languages because language habits ingrained with the first language interfere with
learning the second one (Seidenberg & Zevin, 2006). To distinguish between the sensitive
period hypothesis and such interference accounts, it would be helpful to find
individuals who acquired their first language at different ages. The best line of evidence
in this regard comes from American Sign Language (ASL). As we discussed earlier,
many congenitally deaf children have hearing parents who choose not to allow their
offspring access to ASL. Such children’s first exposure to ASL, therefore, may be quite
late in life when they first establish contact with the deaf community. Because their
hearing deficit did not permit them to learn the spoken language of their caretakers
either, such individuals are learning a first (signed) language at an unusually late point
in maturational time.
How does this late start influence language learning? In one study, all of the participants
had used ASL as their sole means of communication for at least 25 years, guaranteeing
that they were as expert in the language as they would ever become. Some of
them had been exposed to ASL from birth (because their parents were deaf signers).
Others had learned ASL between the ages of 4 and 6 years. A third group had first come
into contact with ASL after the age of 12.
Not surprisingly, all of these signers were quite fluent in ASL, thanks to 25-plus
years of use. But even so, the age at first exposure had a strong effect (Figure 10.37).
Those who had learned ASL from birth used and understood all of its elaborations.
Those whose first exposure had come after the age of 4 years showed subtle
deficits. Those whose exposure began in adolescence or adulthood had much greater
deficits, and their use of function items was sporadic, irregular, and often incorrect
(Newport, 1990, 1999).
Language in Nonhumans
We have seen that language learning is deeply rooted in the nature and development of
human brains. Does this imply that creatures with different sorts of brains will be
unable to learn language? As we will see, the evidence indicates that our nearest animal
relatives cannot come close to attaining human language, even with the best of good
will and the most strenuous educational procedures. At the same time, though, there is
considerable overlap between our biological endowments and those of other primates.
For this reason, we should not be too surprised if some rudiments of language can be
made to grow in them. If so, they may offer insight into the origins of our own communicative
organization.
10.37 Evidence for a sensitive period for
first-language learning These are scores
on a test of ASL by congenitally deaf individuals
who had not learned a spoken language
because of their deafness. The test
was performed between 25 and 30 years
after these individuals had first been
exposed to a sign language, and still, all
those years later, one can still see big
effects of the age at which they began.
.70
.75
.80
.85
.90
Native Early Late
Mean percent correct Age of initial exposure
414 chapter 10 PLANGUAGEO
Recent studies do reveal interesting commonalities between human and animal communication.
For example, vervet monkeys have separate calls of alarm, depending on the
predator—leopard, eagle, or snake, which are responded to differentially by other vervets
(Cheney & Seyfarth, 1990; also see Ghazanfar & Hauser, 1999; S. Green, 1975). Related
communicative uses have been demonstrated for dolphin whistles as well (Reiss,
McCowan, & Marino, 1997; Tyack, 2000). However, animals’ production of sounds is
very restricted, with a vocabulary size of only a few dozen different signals, compared to
the tens of thousands of words in an adult human’s repertoire. And crucially for the comparison
with humans, the animal signals do not combine together to enlarge the number
of messages that can be conveyed. Humans link their words in ever new and
structured ways so as to express new thoughts that listeners easily comprehend. This creative
kind of communication appears to be closed even to our closest primate cousins.
For instance, monkeys have no way to utter differentially “Beware! Monkeys-eatingsnakes”
versus “Beware! Snakes-eating-monkeys.”
On the other hand, animals’ perception of sounds (and comprehension of the meaning
associated with the sounds) is much more impressive than their restricted speaking
(or signing). Wild monkeys and apes live in groups that number into the hundreds, recognize
all of these individuals’ calls, and learn the alarm calls of birds, impala, and other
animals. In captivity they learn to recognize the meaning of all sorts of sounds, like the
voices of different caretakers or the beep of a card swipe that signals feeding time. And
while monkeys and apes rarely produce combinations of calls to convey new messages,
they hear and interpret call combinations all of the time, whenever two of their groupmates
are interacting with each other. For instance, in one experiment, baboons were
played a threatening grunt from Hannah, a low-ranking female in their group, paired
with a submissive scream from Sylvia, a high-ranking female. This seemed to violate the
existing dominance hierarchy and the listeners responded strongly as if startled by the
oddity. On the other hand, they showed little or no response when they heard the threatening
grunt from Sylvia and the submissive scream from Hannah (Bergman, Beehner,
Cheney, & Seyfarth, 2003). Thus, the baboons seem insensitive to the syntax of other
baboon utterances, and this limits their communicative prowess. But, even so, they do
seem sensitive to the context of the utterances, and, in particular, who is saying what to
whom.This context-sensitivity enormously enlarges the number of socially relevant messages
that can be conveyed, making baboon communication richly informative despite
its limits of form and structure (Cheney & Seyfarth, 2007).
Is it possible that with just the right training this limited repertoire of production
can be overcome and animals can master communication skills that
truly deserve the term language? Many researchers have pursued
these possibilities, trying to teach language-like systems to animals
in the laboratory, using a variety of communication media in which
hand gestures, bits of colored plastic, or symbols on a computer
screen stand for words. Researchers have also tried to train a range of
species, including chimpanzees, dolphins, gorillas, dogs, parrots,
and pygmy chimps (bonobos). These animals have made impressive
progress—increasing their gesture “vocabulary” (to roughly 500
“words” in the case of the bonobo Kanzi and close to 300 for the
border collie Rico; Figure 10.38; Kaminski, Call, & Fischer, 2004).
However, the results of these training efforts have all been rather
limited and so utterly fail to support the extravagant descriptions of
these “linguistic creatures” in the popular media. Even after extensive
training, their utterances are rarely more than two words long;
when longer, they tend to involve disorganized repetitions (Give
10.38 Rico the comprehending (but not
talking) dog Rico, a border collie, knows
the names for his 200 or so toys and balls,
and will fetch any one of them upon verbal
command. But alas, though Rico comprehends
so well, his own speech is limited to
the usual border-collie barks, yelps, and
growls.
PLanguage and ThoughtO 415
orange me give eat orange me eat orange give me orange give me you). Their utterances are
typically imitations or expansions of the utterance they just heard from their human
trainers, and their mastery of syntax is sharply limited. For example, no nonhuman has
mastered the distinction between plural and singular nouns, or verb tense, or any
means of marking words for their grammatical class, while every human child of normal
mentality does so by the age of 3 or 4, without explicit training. (For reviews, see
Kako, 1999; Petitto, 1988; Pinker, 1994; Tomasello, 1994, 2003; for contrary views see
also Herman & Uyeyama, 1999; Pepperberg, 1999; Savage-Rumbaugh & Fields, 2000.)
The conclusion, then, is that animals do indeed have rich communicative systems of
their own, but these systems are strikingly, qualitatively, different from human language.
Nonetheless, we can learn from animals in the wild—particularly monkeys and apes—
something about the ancestral communicative system from which language may have
emerged. If modern primates are any guide, our prelinguistic ancestors had some calls
that functioned like words (alarm calls, for example), and were exceptionally skilled at
recognizing others’ voices, distinguishing different call types (screams, threats, and others)
and extracting a huge number of different messages from a limited vocabulary combined
with their interpretation of the situation at hand. Before language, there was a
rich set of meanings and concepts, all embedded in the animals’ socially grounded
knowledge of each other.
LANGUAGE AND THOUGHT
We have seen that the forms and contents of language are very much bound up with the
organization of the human brain and with the ways that humans think and perceive the
world. Languages are alike insofar as they are the central means for transmitting beliefs,
desires, and ideas from one human to another. To accomplish these human communicative
goals, each language must have phonemes, morphemes, phrases, and sentences,
and tens of thousands of different meaningful words. But within these bounds,
languages also differ from one another in various ways. And these differences are not
only with the sounds of the words—that the word meaning “dog” is pronounced dog,
chien,perro, and so on in different communities. Some languages will simply lack a word
that another language has, or refer to the same thing in quite different ways. As one
example, we speak of a certain tool as a screwdriver, literally alluding to the fact that it is
used to push screws in; German uses the term Schraubenzieher, which translates as “a
screw puller”; and French uses the word tournevis (“screw turner”) for the same tool,
thus referring to both the tool’s pushing and pulling functions (Kay, 1996). As we have
also mentioned, sometimes the structures differ across languages too, as with fixed
word-order languages like English and Mandarin Chinese versus those with a quite
free word order such as Finnish and Russian. Further differences are at the social level.
For example, such languages as Italian and French have different pronouns for use
when referring to relative strangers (e.g., French vous, or to intimates tu). Finally, languages
differ in the idioms and metaphors with which they characteristically refer to
the world. Witness English, where your new car can be a lemon even though it is inedible,
your former friend can be a snake in the grass, and your future visit to an underground
cave can be up in the air until its date is settled.
Do these differences matter? Certainly we would not think that Germans and
Americans use different tools for inserting and extracting screws and that only the
French have a single tool for both jobs. At the other extreme, having a linguistically
built-in way to refer differentially to dear friends and total strangers just might
416 chapter 10 PLANGUAGEO
reflect—or even cause—deep distinctions in the social organization of a culture. So
here we consider the possibility that the particulars of one’s language might influence
thought (for an overview, see Gleitman & Papafragou, 2004).
How Language Connects to Thought
In one sense it is totally obvious that language influences thought. Otherwise we would
not use it at all. When one person yells “FIRE!” in a crowded room, all of those who
hear him rapidly walk, run, or otherwise proceed to the nearest exit. In this case, language
influenced the listeners to think, There’s a fire; fire is dangerous; I’d better get out of
here FAST. Language use also influences our thought in other ways. It is a convenient
way of coding, or chunking, information, with important consequences for memory.
The way information is framed when we talk or write can also influence our decisions,
so that a patient is more likely to choose a medical treatment if she is told it has a 50%
chance of success than if she is told it has a 50% chance of failure (see Chapter 8).
Finally, language can influence our attitudes (see Chapter 12), a fact well known to
advertisers and propagandists: Eat crunchy Pritos! Remember Pearl Harbor!
In all these examples, the choice of words and sentences affects our thinking. Of
course, language is not the only way to influence thought and action. Observing the
flames is at least as powerful a motivator to flee as is hearing the cry FIRE! Still, language
is an enormously effective conveyer of information, emotions, and attitudes. This
much ought to be obvious. Why would we ever listen to a lecture or read a poem or a
newspaper if we did not believe that language was a means of getting useful or aesthetically
pleasing information? But when we speak of language differences influencing
thought, it is in quite a different sense from this. In this latter case, we are asking
whether the very forms and contents that a language can express change the nature of
perception and cognition for its speakers.
Do People Who Talk Differently Come to Understand
the World Differently?
The idea that “we dissect nature along lines laid down by our native languages” was forcefully
presented by a linguistic anthropologist, Benjamin Whorf, who studied several native
languages of the Americas. Whorf noticed many distinctions of language and culture
between native American and European societies, and he argued that often the language
differences themselves led to the cultural differences. In his words, “language is not merely
a reproducing instrument for voicing ideas but rather is itself the shaper of ideas, the
program and guide for the individual’s mental activity” (Whorf, 1956, pp. 212–213). So
influential have Whorf’s ideas become that the general position that language affects
thought has come to be identified with his name, as the Whorfian hypothesis.
One frequently mentioned example that Whorf discussed concerns the number of
terms for snow in Inuit or Aleut (sometimes called “Eskimo” languages) compared to
English. This number in Inuit is sometimes claimed to be as large as 300, with different
terms for naming types of snow such as powder, slush, ice, falling snow versus fallen
snow, and so forth.Whorf claimed that speakers of such languages are influenced by
this richness and variety of vocabulary and so end up able to make much finer distinctions
among snow types than are speakers of other languages.
But this example is flawed in several ways. The initial claim about vocabulary size is
actually false; English turns out to have more snow-related terms than does Inuit
(L. Martin, 1986; Pullum, 1991). And even if it were true that Inuit had more words for
Whorfian hypothesis The proposal
that the language one speaks determines
or heavily influences the thoughts
one can think or the saliency of different
categories of thought.
PLanguage and ThoughtO 417
snow than English, would that explain why its speakers are more sensitive to snow distinctions
(if they are) than, say, English-speaking residents of South Carolina or Hawaii?
A plausible alternative is that the Inuits’ day-to-day activities create a functional need for
these discriminations, and this leads both to the larger vocabulary and to the greater skill
in picking out different types of snow. On this view, language does not shape perception.
On the contrary, language and perception are both shaped by environment and culture.
How Can We Study Language and Thought?
Although, as we have just seen, the Inuit snow case does not really hold water (perhaps
we should say it does not hold ice), there are many other aspects in which language distinctions
can be and have been more profitably studied.
COLOR TERMS AND COLOR PERCEPTION
Some languages have a rich and subtle vocabulary of color words (e.g., English puce,
mauve, tea, crimson), while other languages have only a few color terms (Berlin & Kay,
1969). As an extreme case, the Dani people of New Guinea have only two terms
for color, one meaning (roughly) dark/cool and the other meaning light/warm (see
Chapter 5, for these distinctions in the perception of hue). Still, there are strong similarities
in how speakers of English and speakers of Dani perceive color, with the named
color categories in both cultures based on “favored percepts selected from restricted
regions of color space,” and with striking agreement, across the cultures, in which are
“best examples” of each color (Heider, 1972; Regier, Kay, & Cook, 2005).Within these
limits, however, recent evidence suggests that the different color labeling practices
adopted in different languages can influence the ways that nonlinguistic categorization
is carried out by the brain, with left-hemisphere advantages observed primarily in tasks
that require the participant to discriminate between categories that are differently
labeled in his or her language. Particularly interesting is recent evidence that these lefthemisphere
advantages develop in childhood, in conjunction with the acquisition of
the language’s particular color terminology (Kay & Regier, 2006).
THE LANGUAGE OF SPATIAL POSITION AND DIRECTION
Another area in which we can examine the interaction of language and thought is in
descriptions of space, because there are considerable differences in how various
languages describe spatial position. For instance, English speakers would say that the
fruit is in the bowl and also that the DVD is in the laptop, using the same preposition (in)
in both cases. Korean speakers would use two different words in these cases, with one
word conveying the idea of fitting loosely (as the fruit is in the bowl) and the other
describing things that fit tightly (the DVD is in the laptop) (Figure 10.39; Choi &
Bowerman, 1991). As another example, English distinguishes in the word most often
used for vertical contact (on) and vertical noncontact (above), while both Japanese and
Korean favor a single word to convey both on and above.
Despite these linguistic differences, Japanese,Korean, and English speakers all seem
to think about spatial position in very similar ways. In one study, participants were
shown pictures of objects located at various positions with respect to a reference object.
A short time later, they were shown another picture and asked if it depicted the same
scene or a slightly different one. In some cases, this new picture was altered slightly, but
it preserved the relationship (of on or above) shown in the original picture. (The first
418 chapter 10 PLANGUAGEO
10.40 These American birds are sitting in a tree (but
these Korean birds are sitting on a tree) In many languages,
including English, it sounds perfectly natural to
hear that these birds are “in the tree.” But to Korean listeners,
it sounds very odd. They would only say “in” to
describe these birds’ position if the birds were inside a
hole in the tree.
10.39 Spatial words in English and Korean The three panels show items being put into
spatial positions relative to each other. Panel A shows a block being put on other blocks.
Panel B shows a Lego being put on other Legos. Panel C shows a disc being put into a computer.
In English we use the same phrase (put on) to express the action in (A) and (B), and a
different phrase (put in) for action (C). In contrast, Korean uses one term (nohta) to
describe the act in (A), because it consists of putting something on something else loosely,
and uses a different term (kkita) to describe the acts in (B) and (C), because both involve
bringing the objects into a tight fit.
(A) (B) (C)
nohta kkita kkita
put on put on put in
picture, for example, might have shown a cup on a table; the second, a cup still on a table
but shifted slightly to the right.) In other cases, the new picture depicted a change in
this relationship (with the original picture showing the cup on the table and the test
picture showing the cup above the table). If English sensitizes us to the contrast
between on and above, then English speakers should detect alterations that change
these relationships more easily than Koreans or Japanese do. But the data show no such
effect, and the memory performance of all groups was the same (Munnich, Landau, &
Dosher, 2001; also see Hayward & Tarr, 1995; Xu, 2002).
Summarizing here, differences in the language of location and space are large and
clear cut. Indeed speakers of one language express puzzlement at how other linguistic
users express some of these ideas, and have trouble learning the differentiating aspects
of the two languages (Figure 10.40). Yet we know that language itself cannot be what is
creating these categories, because infants are sensitive to these distinctions in the
prelinguistic period. For instance, 5-month-olds in habituation experiments show that
they already distinguish between tightly fitting and loosely fitting (Hespos & Spelke,
PLanguage and ThoughtO 419
2004). Nor can it be said that speakers become less sensitive over time to these distinctions.
If, for instance, a diminished sensitivity to “on” versus “above” were a result of
learning Japanese rather than English, we should all be terrified of flying with Japan
Airlines (Norbury,Waxman, & Song, 2008).
As another example, speakers of Tzeltal (a Mayan language) who live in Tenejapa, a
rural region of Chiapas, Mexico, have no terms for “to the left of” or “to the right of,”
expressions that are obviously available (and often used) in, for example, English,
Dutch, Japanese, and even the Spanish-speaking areas of Chiapas (Figure 10.41).
Rather, these Tenejapens speak of things being roughly to the east, to the south, and so
on. Of course, English speakers too can sensibly use terms like east, but in fact we rarely
use these terms to refer to very nearby things. For instance, Hand me the spoon that’s to
the east of your teacup sounds quite unnatural.
This terminological distinction could be crucial, because words like east and left function
differently: If you turn 180 degrees, what was previously to your east will still be to
your east, but what was previously to your left will now be to your right. This is because
east and west have to do with position relative to an outside landmark (where the sun
rises), whereas left and right have to do with position relative to one’s own body. This
suggests the possibility that spatial reasoning might be different in languages that favor
the left-right distinction versus those that favor the east-west distinction.
Do speakers of Tzeltal actually think about space differently than English or Dutch
speakers do? In one study, speakers of these different languages were asked to memorize
the positions of toy animals lined up on a table (Figure 10.42A). Then the animals were
removed, and the participants were rotated 180degrees to a new table (Figure 10.42B).
The participants were handed the animals and asked to set them up on this new table so
that it is the same as before. Notice that there are two ways to do so (Figure 10.42C and
D): The animals can be set up so that they are still going to the right or still going to the
west. And, in fact, the terminology used by the subjects in their native tongue predicted
the way they solved this problem (Levinson, 2003; Pederson et al., 1998).
This experiment makes a strong initial case that ways of thinking (here, thinking
about space) may be directly influenced by the words in use in a specific language. But
other investigators argue that these results reflect only the specific conditions of testing.
To evaluate this suggestion, these later investigators created test conditions for
English speakers like those under which the Tzeltal group had been studied, for
10.41 A Mayan woman solves a spatial puzzle
420 chapter 10 PLANGUAGEO
example, providing strong landmarks visible to the east and west of the testing area.
Under these conditions, American college students behaved much as the Tzeltal
speakers (who had been tested outdoors in their own community) had behaved in
this same task (Li & Gleitman, 2002).
More recent evidence shows that the differences among speakers of different languages
on rotation tasks are mainly in their understanding of what they think the
experimenter wants them to do. It is no surprise that when the task is presented
ambiguously (“make it the same”) that Tzeltal speakers guess that you are referring
to east-west-the-same and English speakers guess that you are referring to left-rightthe-
same. After all, that is the way their cultures most frequently talk about locations
and directions. As we saw in our earlier discussion of language comprehension the
frequency of words and constructions has a strong effect on our immediate interpretations
of language that we hear (or read), especially under ambiguous circumstances.
We are led down particular garden paths because these are the most
probable ones, in our prior experience. But a further question—sometimes called the
10.42 What is “the same” after rotation? (A) Subjects memorize the order and facing
direction (west; right) of three toy animals while they are seated at the stimulus table.
(B) After a brief delay, the subject is turned around to face a different, blank table (the
recall table) and handed the animals to set up again so that the array is “the same as
before.” (C) The “absolute” response: The subject sets up the animals so they are still
facing west (but now face the subject’s left rather than her right). (D) The “relative”
response: The subject sets up the animals so they are still facing her right (but now are
pointing to the east). (Adapted from S. C. Levinson, 2003)
(A) (C)
Stimulus table
(B) (D)
Recall table
Stimulus table Recall table
Stimulus table Recall table
Stimulus table Recall table
west/right
west/left
east/right
PSome Final Thoughts: Language and CognitionO 421
“strong form” of the Whorfian hypothesis—is whether our thought has become
rigidified so that it is hard or impossible to think in any other way. To find out, investigators
now asked what happens when the task requirements in the rotation experiments
are made unambiguous. The answer is that the differences between Tzeltal
and English performance vanish: In sum, if Tzeltal speakers know you want them to
do a rotation task, or solve a maze, taking left-right perspective rather than east-west
perspective, it turns out that they are as competent as English speakers in doing so
(Li, Abarbinell, Gleitman, & Papafragou, in press). Several recent experiments have
shown, similarly, that linguistic effects on how one thinks are “of the moment” and
are easily reversible by momentary situational context, rather than being lifelong
effects of language particulars on how one can think at all (Boroditsky, 2001; January
& Kako, 2007).
SOME FINAL THOUGHTS:
LANGUAGE AND COGNITION
Overall, then, there is no compelling evidence in favor of the strongest forms of Whorf’s
theory. When these claims are put to a direct test, there seem to be only limited
relationships between specifics of our language and how we perceive or conceive of the
world. These relationships are often not caused by the language; instead they frequently
derive from aspects of the culture or environment in which people and societies exist,
or they are general context effects that apply in much the same way inside and outside
of language (“I just feel like a different person when I’m speaking French or wearing my
Parisian beret”).
In fact, there is little reason to have expected that the words and structures of our
language would change or restrict our thought patterns in rigid and immutable ways. If
they did, it would be very hard to account for how a second—and sometimes third,
fourth, and fifth—language could possibly be learned. In addition, there is no doubt
that forms of thought are often independent of language. For instance, infants who
know no language seem able to think relatively complex thoughts, and some of our
adult thought takes the form of nonlinguistic mental images. Moreover, creatures such
as digger wasps and migrating birds are able to find their way from place to place across
great distances without the benefit of words like north and left (Gallistel, 1990). Finally,
throughout this chapter, we have emphasized the rather impressive sameness of languages
in their units and hierarchical structure; in many aspects of their syntax and
semantics; and in the processes involved in their processing and their acquisition. This
linguistic sameness, in turn, is the reflection of sameness of mentality across the
human species. The use of language influences us and guides us, and surely this is no
surprise: This is one of the essential functions of communication. But this is quite different
from Whorf’s suggestion that language acts as a kind of mental straitjacket limiting
how we can think or what we can think. The bulk of the evidence seems to point
the other way: Language is a bright, transparent medium through which thoughts flow,
relatively undistorted, from one mind to another.
• Language is the biologically given communication system of
our species, and appears in all cultures. Not only does our
language express thought and convey information, it also
expresses and solidifies social and cultural bonding.
THE BUILDING BLOCKS OF LANGUAGE
• Languages consist of a hierarchy of units that combine
and recombine to form higher-level categories. At the bottom
are units of sound, which combine into morphemes
and words.
• The sound categories that matter in a language are called its
phonemes. English uses about 40 different phonemes. Other
languages have their own sets.
• The smallest language units that carry meaning are morphemes.
Content morphemes carry the main burden of meaning.
Function morphemes add details to the meaning and also
serve various grammatical purposes.
• A phrase is an organized grouping of words, and a sentence is
an organized grouping of phrases. Some sequences of words
in a language are allowed, but others are not, in accord with
the rules of syntax. These rules describe the phrase structure of
a sentence, which can be depicted by means of a tree diagram.
HOW LANGUAGE CONVEYS MEANING
• According to the definitional theory of word meaning, bundles
of semantic features constitute the meaning of each word.
Various observations have led to a second theory, that the
meaning of words is represented by an ideal (or prototype)
case, and membership in the category depends on resemblance
to this prototype. A combination of these two theories
best handles the psychological data on word meaning.
• Sentences express propositions, in which some comment, or
predicate, is made about a topic (the subject of the sentence).
A proposition can be regarded as a miniature drama in which
the verb is the action and the nouns are the performers, each
of which plays a different semantic role.
• Sentence interpretation is very rapid, beginning before
whole sentences are heard. This often causes listeners to
jump to temporary false interpretations, called garden paths.
To recover from these momentary misunderstandings, listeners
and readers consider not only the structure they are
hearing but also plausible semantic relations among the
words. This includes integrating the sentence with what they
can see in the visually observed world. In conversation, a
further source of information comes from the fact that
speakers and listeners continually fill in the blanks in what
is uttered, using inference to help them interpret the full
meaning of what is said.
HOW WE LEARN A LANGUAGE
• Language is part of our human endowment. However, human
languages differ in myriad details from each other and thus
have to be learned by children rather than being almost
wholly innate as in many other animal species.
• From the very first moments after birth, infants’ ears and
minds are open to detect the sounds of language, and also
to organize these sounds into words. Initially, infants
respond to just about all sound distinctions made in any
language, but by 12 months of age they are more sensitive to
sound contrasts in their own language than to those in
other languages.
• Infants rapidly learn to identify the boundaries between morphemes
and words.One important cue that helps them do this is
a keen sensitivity to the frequencies with which specific syllables
occur right next to each other.
• Word learning is heavily influenced by the ways the child is
disposed to categorize objects and events, as reflected in the
fact that young children acquire the basic-level words for whole
objects (dog) before learning the superordinates (animal) or
subordinates (Chihuahua).
• Children also use the structure of the language as a way of
guiding their word learning. Remarkably, some understanding
of syntax, and the way it links up with meaning, is found
in children under two years of age, even though these children
themselves often speak only in single-word utterances.
• Children’s speech progresses very rapidly by the beginning of
the third year of life, with the start of little sentences and the
use of function words. Overregularization errors (e.g., holded
for held) are clear evidence that children do not learn language
by imitation; they suggest instead that young children
learn rules that govern how the language is structured.
chapter 10 PLANGUAGEO
S U M M A R Y C H A P T E R 1 0
422
PSummaryO 423
LANGUAGE LEARNING IN CHANGED
ENVIRONMENTS
• Under normal conditions, language emerges in much the same
way in virtually all children. They progress from babbling to
one-word speech, advance to two-word sentences, and eventually
graduate to complex sentence forms and meanings. This
progression is consistent with the claim that language development
is rooted in our shared biological heritage. But what
happens when children grow up in radically different environments?
Data from isolated children, those deprived of
ordinary human contact for many years, suggest that normal
language development may take place as long as language
learning begins during some sensitive period for the acquisition
of linguistic information, which may end roughly at the age of
puberty.
• Many persons born deaf learn sign language. This gestural system
has hand shapes and positions that combine to form
individual words (analogous to the phonemes of spoken language),
and it has morphemes and grammatical principles for
combining words into sentences that are closely similar to
those of spoken language. Babies born to deaf users of sign
language go through the same steps on the way to adult
knowledge as do hearing children learning English. Thus,
language does not depend on the auditory-vocal channel.
• Blind children learn language as rapidly and as well as sighted
children do. Here too, language emerges in all of its complexity
and on schedule despite a dramatic shift away from the
standard circumstances of language learning.
LANGUAGE LEARNING WITH CHANGED
ENDOWMENTS
• Since language learning and use are determined by brain
function, changing the brain should have strong effects.
This is confirmed by several sorts of evidence, including
cases of aphasia, as well as cases of persons with apparently
inherited syndromes such as specific language impairment.
In addition, as the brain matures, a sensitive period for
language learning draws to a close, so that later learning
(both of a first language and of later languages) becomes
more difficult.
• It appears that even our nearest animal relative, the chimpanzee,
cannot come close to attaining human language. For
now, the evidence suggests that animals including baboons,
dogs, dolphins, and even parrots can learn words, and that
they show evidence of rudimentary propositional thought. But
there is little evidence that they can create (or understand) the
sorts of syntactic structures that humans use routinely.
LANGUAGE AND THOUGHT
• According to the Whorfian hypothesis, the language one
speaks determines the way one thinks. Language obviously
conveys information, and this influences thought;
language can also be used to draw our attention to some
content, and, again, this influences thought. However, the
ways that language governs how we can think generally, or
what we can think at all, are probably quite limited. Special
language features can dramatically influence interpretations
of ambiguous speech in momentary ways because the
language processing system is highly responsive to
frequency information which differs cross-linguistically.
Go to StudySpace, wwnorton.com/studyspace, to access
additional review and enrichment materials, including the following
resources for each chapter:
Organize
• Study Plan
• Chapter Outline
• Quiz+ Assessment
Learn
• Ebook
• Chapter Review
• Vocabulary Flashcards
• Drag-and-Drop Labeling
Exercises
• Audio Podcast Chapter
Overview
Connect
• Critical Thinking Activity
• Studying the Mind Video
Podcasts
• Video Exercises
• Animations
• ZAPS Psychology Labs
O N L I N E S T U D Y T O O L S
Intelligence Testing 426
What Is Intelligence? The Psychometric
Approach 428
The Building Blocks of Intelligence 432
Intelligence beyond the IQ Test 436
The Roots of Intelligence 441
Some Final Thoughts: Scientific Evidence
and Democratic Values 457
Summary 458